RECOMMENDED DIETARY ALLOWANCES 
AND ESTIMATED AVERAGE REQUIREMENTS 

NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS FOR INDIANS - 2020 

 
A Report of the Expert Group 

Indian Council of Medical Research 
National Institute of Nutrition 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition 
Hyderabad – 500007, India 

 
 
 

 
 



 
  

 
 



 

  

MESSAGE 
 

Developing the Nutrient Requirements for Indians has been one of the stellar contributions of 
the ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR-NIN). This herculean feat has been achieved 
by NIN with great aplomb and scientific acumen, not once but time and again, but this latest 
book is an exception in ways more than one. 

The changing dietary patterns prompted by a host of factors including agricultural, economic, 
lifestyle, health and nutrition transitions warrant that these recommendations be revisited from 
time to time. And newer scientific evidence and population based data become the bedrock of 
such revisions. It is therefore obvious that the Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) 
become the guiding lights for evolving newer and relevant strategies for tackling the scourge of 
undernutrition, overweight/obesity and associated non-communicable diseases (NCDs) as well 
as the micronutrient deficiencies across the country. 

From the earliest attempts to define the nutrient requirements and desirable dietary intakes of 
nutrients for Indians in the 1940s to the most recent version published in 2011, the RDAs have 
been revisited, revised and reformulated several times, almost once every decade. For every 
revision, newer research, analysis methods and data have been the underpinnings. I have no 
hesitation in saying that the latest version is quite a landmark that will be etched in the history 
of NIN and ICMR. I don’t say this lightly, as this version being brought out in 2020 for the first 
time includes the Estimated Average Requirements (EAR) and also the Tolerable Upper Limits 
(TUL) of nutrients along with RDAs. While RDAs are daily dietary nutrient intake levels which 
would be sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all healthy individuals in a 
particular life stage and gender group, they are not always robust measures for dietary 
assessment of groups because they refer to an intake level that far exceeds the requirement of a 
large proportion of individuals within the group.  

Tele.: 26588204, 26589620, Fax (Off.): 91-11-26588662, E-mail: secy-dg@icmr.gov.in 

 
 



 
On the other hand, EARs are the average daily nutrient intake levels estimated to meet 

 the requirements of half of the healthy individuals in a particular life stage and gender 
group. These are very useful in evaluating the nutritional status of populations or 

  
groups. This book therefore aptly alludes to both RDAs and EARs in its title. The TULs, 
I am sure would be of great help in defining the limits for fortification of foods with 
nutrients. 

Hearty congratulations to each and every scientist of ICMR-NIN, academics and 
researchers from different parts of the country who contributed to this effort. My 
sincere commendations to the Expert Committee led by late Prof. M. K. Bhan and Prof. 
Anura. V. Kurpad for their guidance and contributions. My appreciations to Dr. 
Hemalatha R, the Director of NIN for leading this effort from the forefront and 
completing it successfully. 

I am sure this will turn out to be a guiding light for making India nutritionally 
Atmanirbhar (self-reliant). 

 

 
 



 

  

MESSAGE 

The present revision of Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA) is based on the available 
recent data and technologies. It is well timed keeping in view the economic and epidemiologic 
transition that India is going through, which necessitates new norms of nutrient requirements 
for shaping the health of not only present but also future generations of India. In the last 
decade, there have been advancements in research concomitant with the nutrition transition 
prompting a paradigm shift in addressing the nutrition health issues confronting us. 
Considering the available evidences, based on a careful review of the literature, keeping 
reduction of disease risk as the key criterion along with maintenance of optimal health, the 
RDA was formulated to meet/satisfy the nutritional needs of all healthy people centred around 
the estimated average requirements (EAR).  The EAR for each nutrient was derived based on a 
specific criterion of adequacy selected to meet the requirements. Substantial changes have been 
made for energy requirement for adults considering the fact that the Indians have different 
body composition and considerably lower basal metabolism compared to western population. 

This revision of RDA along with EAR would be useful for all stakeholders including policy 
makers, regulators, academic, dieticians and industry  

My sincere thanks to all the expert committee members for their valuable guidance, suggestions 
and contributions and the resource persons whose relentless work helped us to bring out this 
revision of RDA along with EAR at this right juncture of changing nutrition scenario in India. 
Also, our gratitude to the Director-General, ICMR and the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Government of India for their unstinted support. 

 

 
 



  

 
 



CONTENTS  
 

S. No. Chapter Page No. 
 Foreword i 
 Members of the Expert Committee and Resource Persons iii 
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 General Considerations 5 
2. Summary of Recommendations 

13 
A Short Report: RDA and EAR - 2020 

3. Reference Body Weights 22 
4. Energy 30 
5. Proteins and Amino Acids 66 
6. Fats and Oils 99 
7.1 Dietary Fiber 116 
7.2 Carbohydrates 122 
8. Minerals 135 
8.1 Calcium and Phosphorous 135 
8.2 Magnesium 154 
8.3 Sodium and Potassium 159 
9. Iron 167 
10. Zinc 180 
11. Trace Elements 190 
11.1 Copper, Manganese, Chromium 190 
11.2 Selenium 195 
11.3 Iodine 200 
12. Water Soluble Vitamins 209 
12.1 Thiamine 209 
12.2 Riboflavin 216 
12.3 Niacin 224 
12.4 Vitamin B6 228 
12.5 Folate 236 
12.6 Vitamin B12 244 
12.7 Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) 250 
13. Fat Soluble Vitamins 257 
13.1 Vitamin A 257 
13.2 Vitamin D 272 
13.3 Vitamin E and K 277 
14. Water 280 
15. Anti-oxidants 291 
16. Recommendations for Future Research 296 
17. Appendices 

Food composition and nutrient content value of balanced diet for 
A1. Moderate active man 299 
A2. Sedentary man 300 
A3. Moderate active woman 301 
A4. Sedentary woman 302 
A5. Pregnant woman 303 
A6. Key micronutrients in vegetable and animal foods 304 

 
 

 
 



 

 
 



FOREWORD 
 

 

The formulation of the recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) for Indians had a long and 
distinguished history. The RDA of energy for Indians was first proposed by the Nutrition Advisory 
Committee (NAC) of the Indian Research Fund Association (IRFA) [now Indian Council of 
Medical Research (ICMR)] in 1944. These recommendations were based on the proposals of the 
Health Committee of the League of Nations made in 1935 but adapted to the lower body weights of 
Indian adults. The 1944 recommendations for energy for Indians were revised subsequently by the 
NAC of the ICMR in 1958 in the wake of reports by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
on energy and protein. Subsequently, in 1968 and 1978 the ICMR committee revised the 
requirements for all nutrients except energy. Considerable additional information and newer 
statistical approaches for deriving energy requirements were generated and the FAO/WHO/UNU 
revised approaches in 1985 and again in 2004.  

 
In 1989, the ICMR Expert Group adopted the procedure of 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU Expert 

Consultations and revised the Indian RDA. The ICMR 2010 committee RDA recommendations 
further revised and upgraded the RDAs for Indians based on the international data provided by 
FAO/WHO/UNU expert committee and based on weight and height collected across 16 states by 
NIN-NNMB rural data. 

 
The present committee took the latest statistical approaches to derive the requirements through 

definitions of their distributions, such that the estimated average requirement (EAR) could be 
defined for population requirements, and the upper 95th percentile of the distribution could be used 
to define the individuals’ requirements to place them at low risk of a deficient intake. In addition, 
since several foods are now being fortified with nutrients, the tolerable upper limits of intake of 
nutrients were also defined. The need for these new nutrient requirements has been because dietary 
patterns have changed with economic and nutrition transition occurring during the last decade. The 
double burden of malnutrition is evident in India. Nutrient requirements have to be reviewed with 
respect to recent data on energy expenditure, protein metabolism and in case of minerals and 
vitamins- data on losses and absorption need to be explored to derive EAR and RDA. 

 
The process for generating this report was similar to the earlier recommendations. This draft 

Report was circulated to the Expert Group members and external Resource Persons well in advance 
of the meeting for them to go through and make specific comments on the requirements. Each 
nutrient was considered one by one at the expert group meeting for discussing the specific 
comments of the members of the expert group and resource persons. The presence of Dr. Maharaj 
Kishan Bhan, who passed away earlier this year, as Chair of this expert committee was invaluable. 
He had been a pillar of support to the ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition, serving for 10 years as 
the Chair of its Scientific Advisory Committee. The ICMR 2020 Committee wishes to place on 
record its deep appreciation for his guidance and expertise.   

 
 
 
 
 

i 
 



 
 
 
I wish to place on record my gratitude and appreciation for the stellar work of the scientists of 

National Institute of Nutrition, ably led by its Director, Dr. R. Hemalatha, the members of the 
Expert Committee, and the external reviewers of specific chapters, for bringing out this report in 
good time. 

 
 
 

Dr. Anura. V. Kurpad 
Co-Chairman 

Professor & Former Head 
Nutrition Division, Founding Dean 

St. John's Research Institute 
Bangalore - 560 034 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 



Expert Committee Members 

Chairman  
Dr. M. K. Bhan 
Former Secretary 
Department of Biotechnology, GoI 

Co-Chairman 
Dr. Anura. V. Kurpad 
Professor & Former Head 
Nutrition Division, Founding Dean 
St. John's Research Institute 
Bangalore - 560 034 

Member Secretary 
Dr. R. Hemalatha  
Director 
ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad – 500 007 

Members 

Dr. A. Laxmaiah 
Scientist-G & HoD 
Public Health Nutrition Division 
ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad – 500 007 

Dr. K. V. Radhakrishna 
Consultant, NIN-TATA Centre 
ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad – 500 007 

Dr. Kamala Krishnaswamy 
Former Director (Retd.), ICMR-NIN 
H.No. 2-98/2, Sriniketan, Kakateeya Nagar Colony 
Habsiguda, Hyderabad – 500 007 

Dr. Prema Ramachandran 
Director, Nutrition Foundation of India 
C-13, Qutab Institutional Area 
New Delhi – 110 016 

Dr. H. P. S. Sachdev 
Sr. Consultant in Paediatrics & Clinical Epidemiology 
Sitaram Bharatia Institute  
of Science and Research, B-16 
Qutab Institutional Area, New Delhi- 110 016 

Dr. Mahtab. S. Bamji 
Former Director Grade Scientist,ICMR-NIN  
211, Sri Dattasai Apartments 
Charminar x Roads, Hyderabad – 500 020 

Dr. G. S. Toteja 
Scientist-H & Additional DG and  
Head (Nutrition) 
Indian Council of Medical Research 
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi – 110 029 

iii 
 



Resource Pe  rsons 
 

   Dr. V. Vijayalakshmi  Dr. B. Santosh Kumar 
Scientist G & HoD Scientist C 
Division of Stem Cell Research Division of Clinical Research 
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition ICMR-National institute of Nutrition 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 

Dr. G. Bhanuprakash Reddy Dr. Paras Sharma 
Scientist G & HoD Scientist C 
Division of Biochemistry Division of Food Chemistry 
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition ICMR-National institute of Nutrition 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 

Dr. Bharati Kulkarni Dr. M. Raja Sriswan 
Scientist F & HoD Scientist C 
Division of Clinical Research Division of Clinical Epidemiology  
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition ICMR-National institute of Nutrition 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 

Dr. Ahamed Ibrahim  Dr. M. Mahesh Kumar 
Scientist F & HoD Scientist C 
Division of Lipid Chemistry  Division of Clinical Epidemiology  
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition ICMR-National institute of Nutrition 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad – 500007 Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 

Dr. P. Suryanarayana Dr. B. Naveen Kumar 
Scientist F Scientist C, Statistics Division 
Division of Lipid Chemistry  ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition 
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition Tarnaka, Hyderabad – 500007 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 

Dr. Ayesha Ismail Mr. V. Raju Naik 
Scientist E,  Scientist C, NICHE Division 
Division of Biochemistry  ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition 
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition Tarnaka, Hyderabad – 500007 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 

Dr. P. Raghu Dr. P. Raghavendra 
Scientist E Scientist B 
Division of Biochemistry  Division of Public Health Nutrition  
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition ICMR-National institute of Nutrition 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 

Dr. M. Radhika Dr. K. Damayanti 
Scientist E & HoD Former Scientist-E & HoD,  
Dietetics Division Dietetics Division, ICMR-NIN 
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition H.No.3-4-1007, A-G, M.G. Naidu 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 Apartments, Barkatpura – 500 027 

Dr. R. Ananthan Dr. Y. Venkataramana 
Scientist D Former Scientist G, ICMR-NIN 
Division of Food Chemistry H.No.19-58/2/B/1, Jaya Raghavendra 
ICMR-National institute of Nutrition Nagar, Teachers Colony, Kalyanpuri 
Tarnaka, Hyderabad - 500007 Uppal, Hyderabad 

 
 
 

iv 
 



 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

          

We wish to convey our sincere thanks to Mr. P. S. Rama Rao, Technical Officer, ICMR-

NIN who worked tirelessly in compiling the RDA-2020 report. We also appreciate his technical 

expertise and support. We also acknowledge the support of Mr. S. Devendran, Sr.Technician-2 

(Artist), ICMR-NIN in designing the cover page. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

v 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

vi 
 



1.1 INTRODUCTION 
 

This book defines the nutrient requirements for Indians based on concepts related to the 
distribution of requirements in normal individuals of all ages. A fundamental part of defining nutrient 
requirements is that the requirement is not the same in all people.  It can vary considerably in healthy 
individuals.  In order to derive a single value for the requirement, two features of this distribution of 
requirements are used. First, the median of this distribution is called the estimated average 
requirement (EAR). The EAR is the nutrient requirement used in public health nutrition, to evaluate 
the nutrient intakes of a population. Second, the 97.5th percentile of the distribution is called the 
Recommended Daily Allowance. The RDA is for healthy individuals and may be prescribed to satisfy 
the nutritional needs of specific nutrients in a specific life stage and gender group and ensures that 
there is a very small risk of the nutrient intake being inadequate. With the RDA, there is also the risk 
of excess intake, since each individual may not actually require that much. There is no need to 
consume higher doses on regular basis or for prolonged period without supervision. Therefore, 
readers of this book will note that there has been a shift from the previous edition, and two distinct 
nutrient requirements are now presented: the EAR and RDA. In addition, nutrients are also toxic 
when ingested at very high doses. This has resulted in the definition of the Tolerable Upper Limit of 
Intake (TUL). Intake of nutrients more than the TUL invites the risk of toxicity. It cannot be 
overstated that when assessing the health and nutritional status of the population, the EAR is 
recommended as the unit of requirement. 

 
In India, the first attempt to define nutrient requirements and desirable dietary intakes of 

nutrients for Indians to maintain good health was made by the Nutrition Advisory Committee of the 
Indian Research Fund Association [Now Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)] in 19441. This 
followed the recommendations made by the Technical Committee of the Health Committee, League 
of Nations in 19362, Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council, USA, 19443 and 
Report of the Committee of Nutrition, British Medical Association 19334. During this period, 
requirements and allowances of only energy, protein, iron, calcium, vitamin A, thiamine, riboflavin, 
ascorbic acid and vitamin D for Indians were considered. Considering these recommendations, a 
typical balanced diet based on habitual Indian dietary habits was formulated to provide all the 
nutrients for a normal adult reference man of 55 kg and a normal adult reference woman of 45 kg 
body weight5. This was used to demonstrate that the diet then consumed by Indians, particularly by 
the poor, was deficient in several nutrients and could be improved by inclusion of some protective 
foods. 
 
THE CURRENT NUTRITION SCENARIO IN INDIA 
 

India is in developmental transition and is facing the dual burden of malnutrition. The pre-
transition diseases like undernutrition and infectious diseases as well as post-transition, lifestyle-
related degenerative diseases such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases and 
cancers are wide-spread in India. The last National Family Health Survey (NFHS) – 4 indicates a 
slight decline in undernutrition, with a prevalence of stunting as 38.4% and wasting as 21.5%6. 
Simultaneously, the burden of overnutrition has increased to about 20% in adult men and women6.  

 
Severe clinical forms of Protein Energy Malnutrition (PEM) - kwashiorkor and marasmus have 

become very rare. Over 50% women (particularly pregnant women) and children suffer from iron 
deficiency anaemia (IDA), aggravated by helminthic infections. Though blindness due to vitamin A 
deficiency has become rare, a survey conducted by National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) 

1 
 



shows that milder grades of deficiency as judged by clinical signs like night blindness and Bitot’s 
spots and low serum vitamin A levels, are common7. Deficiencies of other micronutrients like some 
B-complex vitamins particularly riboflavin, folic acid and perhaps vitamin B12 are also common. 
Rickets has become rare, but recent studies from North and South India show that vitamin D 
deficiency as judged by serum levels of 25-hydroxy vitamin D exists in adults. This, besides low 
intake of calcium, may be responsible for the high prevalence of osteoporosis particularly in women. 
The problem of severe forms of Iodine Deficiency Disorders (IDD) (an environmental problem) has 
been considerably reduced after universalization of Iodized salt. However due to improper 
implementation, milder forms of IDD persist in many districts. For every frank case of nutrition 
deficiency, there are dozens of others who suffer from sub-clinical malnutrition. 
 
REVISION OF HUMAN NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS 
 

In the wake of reports by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) on calorie8,9 and 
protein10 in 1950 and 1957 respectively, an attempt was made by the ICMR in 1958 through its 
Nutrition Advisory Committee (NAC) to revise protein and calorie requirements of Indians, based on 
data available at that time11. In 1968, the requirements of all nutrients except energy were reviewed 
by an Expert Committee constituted by ICMR12. In 1978, the Recommended Dietary Allowances 
(RDA) for Indians were again reviewed by another Expert Group of the ICMR and RDAs of several 
nutrients were revised13. In the recommendations made by the ICMR Expert Group in 1968 and 1978, 
a wide range of balanced diets for different age and sex groups were formulated which, if consumed, 
could ensure a daily intake of all nutrients at the recommended levels. The recommendations on 
human protein and energy requirements were again revised by a Joint Expert Group of FAO, WHO 
and United Nations University (UNU) in 198514. In arriving at human energy requirement, this 
International Expert Group followed an entirely new set of guidelines. Based on the new international 
guidelines, the ICMR 1989 revised the RDA for Indians16. However, no substantial changes were 
made in the RDAs for protein, B-complex vitamin, iron and calcium. Also, no definitive 
recommendations were made for trace elements. Over the years, with the advancement in the data on 
various nutrients among Indians, the ICMR 2010 committee made changes to the RDAs17. The ICMR 
2010 committee recommendations were generated based on the international data provided by 
FAO/WHO/UNU expert committee and data generated in India.  
 
 Energy allowances for Indians, which were recommended in 1958, had not been revised till 
1988. In 1988, an Expert Group was constituted by the ICMR. The previous Expert committees of 
ICMR, while following the new guidelines of the Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Consultative Group of 
198514, also considered the updated data on Indians that had accumulated after 197315, to define the 
energy and protein requirements of Indians. The Expert Group also defined the requirement of other 
nutrients like fat, vitamin D and vitamin A. No changes were, however, made in the recommendations 
on the requirement of B-complex vitamins, iron and calcium. Further, recommendations on several 
additional nutrients such as carbohydrate, dietary fiber, water, phosphorus, vitamin E and vitamin K 
or dietary factors not considered by the earlier ICMR Expert Committees and made provisional 
recommendations on their desirable intakes to maintain good health. Dietary fat requirements were 
examined in greater detail and recommendations regarding the requirement in terms of invisible and 
visible fat were made16. The reference body weights of normal healthy adult man, woman and 
children were also altered based on the body weight data on healthy normal adults and children 
obtained by National Institute of Nutrition (NIN)18,19. 
 
 Subsequently, the FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation considered the revision of human 
nutrient requirements again after 2000. One Committee revised the requirement of micronutrients in 
200120, energy in 200421 and protein in 200722. In its revision, the international expert group 

2 
 



considered several other micronutrient requirements of humans. The energy requirement, particularly 
of children 1-10 years was based on stable oxygen use and energy requirement of adults was guided 
by widespread prevalence of overweight and obesity in the west. In case of proteins, requirement of 
indispensable amino acids (IAA) was discussed in greater detail and RDA for IAA were also 
included. With the advancement in research in nutrition, the ICMR 2010 Expert Group17 had revised 
and upgraded the RDAs for Indians.  
 
 However, in the last decade, there has been further advancement in the research with paradigm 
shift in nutritional status of the population. Considering the evidences, the RDAs of nutrients for 
Indians have been revised by the current ICMR Expert Group. Substantial changes have been made 
in energy requirement for adults considering the fact that the Indians are becoming more sedentary 
and the basal metabolism of Indians are far different from western population. The present 
requirement includes the Estimated Average Requirement (EAR), RDA and Tolerable Upper Limit 
(TUL) as mentioned in chapter-2 (framework for nutrient requirement).  
 

 
WHY ICMR-NIN DIETARY RECOMMENDATIONS 2020? 

 

 Over the past decade, dietary patterns have changed with economic and nutrition transition 
at the community level. These rapid changes are relevant to the dual burden of malnutrition 
in India. Nutrient requirements have to be reviewed with respect to these changes in food 
intake, access, and lifestyle.  

 Until now, a single value, the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) was used for all 
nutrients. Over the years the nutrient requirements have evolved so that they can be 
specifically used for individuals or populations. The present recommendations propose the 
use of the Estimated Average Requirements (EAR) for evaluating population nutrient 
intake and the Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA) for setting the safe nutrient 
intake for an individual.  

 Several foods now being fortified with nutrients, the Tolerable Upper Limit (TUL) of 
intake for nutrients is essential, and therefore the TUL has also been defined.  

 New data are incorporated for bioavailability of nutrients, wherever available. 

 
  

3 
 



References 

1. Nutrition advisory committee of the Indian Research Fund Association (IRFA). A report of the twelfth 
meeting. New Delhi, India; 1944. 

2. LEAGUE ON. The problem of nutrition. Vol. 2. Report on the physiological bases of nutrition drawn up 
by the Technical Commission of the Health Committee. The problem of nutrition. Vol. 2. Report on the 
physiological bases of nutrition drawn up by the Technical Commission of the Health Committee. 1936;2. 

3. Food and Nutrition Board of the Nutrition Research Council, USA Recommended Dietary Allowances. 
NRC Reprint and Circular No. 127. 1944. 

4. British Medical Association. Report of the Committee on Nutrition. Brit Med J (Suppl.) Nov. 25, 1933. 

5. Aykroyd WR. The nutritive value of Indian foods and the planning of satisfactory diets. The nutritive value 
of Indian foods and the planning of satisfactory diets. 1937(23). 

6. IIPS I. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4), 2015–16. International Institute for Population Sciences 
(IIPS), Mumbai, India. 2017. 

7. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau. Prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies. NNMB Technical Report 
No. 22. 2003. 

8. FAO. Calorie requirements. Report of the Committee on Calorie Requirements, FAO Nutritional Studies, 
no. 5, Washington, D.C.: 1950. 

9. FAO. Calorie requirements. Report of the Second Committee on Calorie Requirements. FAO Nutritional 
Studies, no. 15, Rome: 1957. 

10. FAO. Protein Requirements. Report of the Committee on Calorie Requirements, FAO Nutritional Studies 
No.16, 1957. 

11. Patwardhan VN. Dietary Allowances for Indians. Calorie Requirements. Special Report. Indian Council 
of Medical Research. 1960(35):1-20. 

12. Gopalan C and Narasinga Rao BS. Dietary Allowances for Indians. Special Report Series No. 60. ICMR, 
New Delhi, 1968. 

13. ICMR, Recommended Dietary Intakes for Indians. Report of an Expert Group, New Delhi, 1978.  

14. Joint FAO/WHO/UNU, Energy and Protein Requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert 
Consultants, WHO Technical Report Series 724, 1985. 

15. FAO/WHO, Energy and Protein Requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO ad-hoc Expert Committee, 
WHO Technical Report Series No. 522, Geneva, 1973. 

16. ICMR, Nutrient requirements and Recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A Report of the Expert 
Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 1990. 

17. ICMR, Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A report of the expert 
group of the Indian Council of Medical Research National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad, 2010. 

18. Raghavan KV, Singh D, Swaminathan MC. Heights and weights of well-nourished Indian school children. 
Indian Journal of Medical Research. 1971; 59(4):648-54. 

19. Rao DH, Satyanarayana K, Sastry JG. Growth pattern of well-to-do Hyderabad pre-school children. Indian 
Journal of Medical Research. 1976; 64(5):629-38. 

20. FAO W. Human vitamin and mineral requirements. Report of a joint FAO/WHO expert consultation, 
Bangkok, Thailand. Food and Nutrition Division, FAO, Rome. 2001:235-47.  

21. FAO F. Nutrition Technical Report Series 1: Human Energy Requirements. Report of a joint 
FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation 2001. Rome FAO, 2004. 

22. WHO J. Protein and amino acid requirements in human nutrition. World health organization technical 
report series. 2007(935):1. 

4 
 



1.2 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
 Humans need a wide range of nutrients to lead a healthy and active life. The required nutrients 
for different physiological groups can only be derived from a well-balanced diet. Components of the 
diet must be chosen judiciously to provide all the nutrients to meet the human requirements in proper 
proportions for the different physiological activities. The amount of each nutrient needed for an 
individual depends upon his or her age, body weight and physiological status. Adults need nutrients 
for maintenance of constant body weight and for ensuring proper body function. Infants and young 
children grow rapidly and require nutrients not only for maintenance but also for growth. They require 
relatively more nutrients (3-5 times) per kg body weight than adults. In physiological conditions like 
pregnancy and lactation, adult woman needs additional nutrients to meet the demand for fetal growth 
and maternal tissue expansion in pregnancy and milk secretion during lactation. These extra intakes 
of nutrients are essential for normal growth of infants in utero and during early post-natal life. 
  

There are certain general guidelines in arriving at Nutrient Requirement and Dietary 
Allowances for various groups. The nutrient requirement of an individual and the dietary allowances 
for a group or a population are distinctly different. The former depends upon the age, body weight 
and physiological and metabolic status of the individual. The latter must also take into consideration 
individual variation within the group, quality of the diet, effect of cooking and processing and bio-
availability of the nutrient from the diet. 
 
1.2.1. General Principles for deriving human nutrient requirements 
 

Several methods have been employed over the years to arrive at the requirement of different 
nutrients for individuals of different physiological groups and some of these methods have improved 
with time. The general principles underlying these methods are: 
 
Dietary intakes: This approach is used to arrive at the energy requirement of children. Energy intakes 
of normal growing healthy children are used for this purpose. Currently it is not in use as it is 
considered to overestimate the requirement and not yield correct figures. 
 
Growth: Daily intake of breast milk and its nutrient content are utilized to define the nutrient 
requirement during early infancy (0-1y). This approach is also no longer in use as it leads to an 
overestimation of the requirement during early infancy. However, the mode of satisfying the nutrient 
requirement in early infancy (upto 6 months) is only through breast milk intake. 
 
Nutrient balance: The minimum intake of a nutrient for equilibrium (intake = output) in adults and 
nutrient consistent retention with satisfactory growth in infants and children, for satisfactory maternal 
and foetal growth during pregnancy, satisfactory breast milk output during lactation have been used 
widely in arriving at the protein requirements. 
 
Obligatory loss of nutrients: The minimal loss of any nutrient or its metabolic product (viz. 
nitrogenous end products of proteins) through normal routes of elimination viz. urine, faeces and 
sweat is determined on a diet devoid of, or very low in the nutrient under study (viz. protein-free 
diet). These values are used to determine the amount of nutrient to be consumed daily through the 
diet to replace the obligatory loss of the nutrient and it represents the maintenance needs of an 
individual (viz. adults). In infants and children, growth requirements are added to this maintenance 
requirement. This approach has been widely used in assessing the protein requirement. Other losses 
of N through sweat, hair etc., are not considered in this method. 
 

5 
 



Factorial approach: In this approach, the nutrients required for different functions, are assessed 
individually and added up to arrive at the total daily requirement. This has been the basis of computing 
the energy requirements (viz., sleep + rest + occupational activity + non-occupational activity). This 
approach was being used earlier for assessing the protein requirements also. 
 
Nutrient turnover: Results from studies on turnover of nutrients in healthy persons, using isotopically 
labeled nutrients are employed in arriving at the requirement of certain nutrients. Requirements of 
vitamin A1, vitamin C2, iron3 and vitamin B 4

12  have been determined through this approach. Earlier, 
radioactive isotopes were used and currently stable isotopes, which are safer and being increasingly 
used to determine the turnover of nutrients in the body5. Stable isotopes are particularly useful, as 
they are safer, in determining the turnover of nutrients in infants, children, in women particularly 
during pregnancy and lactation where use of radioisotopes are contraindicated. Stable isotope labeled 
nutrients are however expensive and difficult to obtain. 
 
Depletion and repletion studies: This approach is used in arriving at the human requirement of water-
soluble vitamins. The level of the vitamin or its coenzyme in serum or cells (erythrocytes, leucocytes) 
is used as the biochemical marker of the vitamin status. Human requirements of ascorbic acid (vitamin 
C), thiamine (vitamin B1) riboflavin (vitamin B2), and pyridoxine (vitamin B6) have been determined 
employing this approach. Healthy volunteers are first fed a diet with very low levels of the vitamin 
till the biochemical parameter of the vitamin (or its coenzyme) reaches a low level. Response to 
feeding graded doses of the vitamin with the diet is then determined. The level at which the response 
increases rapidly corresponds to the level of the requirement of the vitamin. 
 
1.2.2. Frame work for nutrient requirements 
 

Several countries recommend nutrient intakes for their populations, which are used to plan and 
evaluate the nutrient intakes of healthy people.  Nutritional policies, food regulations and nutritional 
programs are based on these nutrient intake recommendations2. The recommended values differ from 
country to country and could range from a single value for a population group (as in the 2010 ICMR 
NIN RDA6), to four different values that define a ‘lower reference intake’, an ‘average requirement’, 
a ‘recommended intake’ for individuals from a specific population, and an ‘upper tolerable intake’6,7. 
These values also differ for a given nutrient depending on the stage in life cycle and gender of the 
individuals. 

 
In 2007, the United Nations University’s Food and Nutrition Program, in collaboration with the 

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO), and the UNICEF, 
attempted to harmonize the nutrient requirement recommendations used across several countries, and 
coined the term Nutrient Intake Values (NIV), using primary data from several countries. These were 
primarily, Dietary Reference Values (DRV, UK), Nutrient Reference Values (NRV, Australia, New 
Zealand), Reference Values for nutrient supply (Germany, Austria, Switzerland), and Dietary 
Reference Intakes (DRI, USA, Canada)7,8. The approach to describing the average requirement and 
the recommended intake are shown in Figure 1.2.1. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

6 
 



Figure 1.2.1: Distribution of the requirements of a theoretical nutrient in a population, 
showing EAR/ANR and RDA/RNI.  The TUL is also depicted as an intake in excess* 

  

ANR RNI TUL 
EAR RDA 

Proportion 
of people 

Daily nutrient requirement 
  

*  The d ashed line on the X-axis depicts a variable distance between the RNI/RDA and the TUL for different 
nutrients. 

	 
Two of the NIV’s were recommended for comparability across all countries for specific life 

stages and genders: average nutrient requirement (ANR) which is equivalent to the Estimated 
Average Requirement (EAR9) and Upper Nutrient Level (UNL) equivalent to the Tolerable Upper 
Limit (TUL9). The other values like the Reference Nutrient Intake (RNI)/ Recommended Dietary 
Allowance (RDA)/ Recommended Dietary Intake (RDI), which are very similar to each other, and 
the Lower Reference Nutrient Intake (LRNI), were derived values from the two recommended NIV’s.  
Each of these terms is defined in Table 1.2.1. 

 
An additional term i.e., used is the Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges (AMDR).  

The AMDR is a range of macronutrient intakes that is associated with a reduced risk of chronic 
diseases, but at the same time, provides adequate intakes of essential nutrients. It is usually expressed 
as a percentage of energy, with a lower and upper limit. 

 
The key measurements within this framework, as defined above, are that of the EAR and its 

variance, and that of the TUL. The EAR is ideally directly measured experimentally.  This has been 
done for some nutrients, for example, energy, protein and amino acids10,11. However, this also has to 
be performed at different ages, since growth imposes its own demand on daily nutrient intake, while 
aging has its unique impact on the requirement.  If the measurement is performed easily and non-
invasively, then it is ideal for use across ages. Unfortunately, many of these measurements require 
some degree of invasive procedures, meaning that the measurement is not possible in vulnerable 
populations; and a careful selection of subjects, and controlled settings, meaning that these are 
‘laboratory or perfect conditions’ measurements, and not ‘real world’.  The use of stable isotope 
technology has been key to the development of less invasive measurements, such as the double-

7 
 



labelled water method for the measurement of energy expenditure11, or the indicator amino acid 
oxidation method for indispensable amino acid requirements12. The key measurements used in the 
framework of nutrient requirements are the mean of the requirements or the EAR, and the distribution 
or variance of the requirements, which yields a standard deviation (SD), which is used to calculate 
the RDA.  Note that a normal distribution is required for this method; if the distribution is not normal, 
then it must be normalized before the SD is used. This is relevant for some nutrient requirements, 
notably protein and iron. 

 
Table 1.2.1: Definition of terms used in the framework of nutrient requirements 

 
Estimated Average Refers to the average daily nutrient intake level estimated to 
Requirement (EAR) meet the requirements of half of the healthy individuals in a 

particular life stage and gender group. It is used primarily to 
evaluate populations or groups. 

Recommended Dietary Refers to the daily dietary nutrient intake level that is sufficient 
Allowance (RDA) to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97–98 percent) 

healthy individuals in a particular life stage and gender group. 
This is derived from the EAR as the mean plus 2 standard 
deviations (SD) of the distribution of requirements. The term is 
used to primarily evaluate individual diets. The RDA is 
inappropriate for dietary assessment of groups as it is the intake 
level that exceeds the requirement of a large proportion of 
individuals within the group. 

Tolerable Upper Level Refers to the highest average daily nutrient intake level that is 
(TUL) likely to pose no risk of adverse health effects to almost all 

individuals in the general population. As intake increases above 
the TUL, the risk of adverse effects will increase.  

Adequate Intake (AI) These values are used when EAR or RDA cannot be determined.  
 The AI is the recommended average daily intake level based on 

observed or experimentally determined approximations or 
estimates of nutrient intake by a group of apparently healthy 
people that are assumed to be adequate.  

Lower threshold intake Refers to a value derived from the EAR and is calculated as the 
(LTI) EAR minus 2 SD of the distribution of requirements. This value 

is sufficient to meet the needs of the bottom 2% of individuals. 
However, countries have used a different cut off such as 5% or 
10% to evaluate nutrient insufficiency, although the concern is 
that these values would set a very low expectation of the 
individual nutrient intake adequacy level. 

 
If the EAR cannot be experimentally measured, another approach is to deconstruct the total 

daily requirement into a set of compartments or factors that can be added up.  For example, energy 
requirements are calculated as the sum of the basal requirement, and the requirement of activity and 
thermogenesis11. This requires assumptions to be made of the mean of each factor and is called the 
factorial method. The distribution of the requirement is either assumed from observations in the 
literature or calculated indirectly from the variability of body size or growth, which is a key ‘factor’ 
in determining the daily requirement. 
 

8 
 



1.2.3. Conceptual basis for calculating the risk of nutrient inadequacy 
 

An individual has inadequate intake when the intake does not meet the requirement of the 
nutrient. If the distribution of requirements in a population is established (and the individual could be 
reasonably said to be representative of this population), then the EAR and the RDA will be derived.  
Since the RDA is the sum of the EAR and 2 SD, recommending this intake for an individual will 
mean that his/her chances of being at risk of an inadequate intake is <2.5%.   

 
In a population, the risk of inadequacy translates to the proportion of people whose usual intake 

of a nutrient does not meet their requirement. The risk of an inadequate intake in the population can 
be easily calculated if population level data on usual intakes and the requirement are available (this 
is not usually the case).  If this were available, one critical requirement of risk calculation is that the 
intake distribution does not correlate with the requirement distribution (Figure 1.2.2). As can be seen 
from this theoretical figure, the nutrient intakes of a population are quite variable and have a large 
range. The tightly regulated nutrient requirements, as expected in biological systems, are represented 
on the Y-axis. The result is that the scatter does not lie on the line of identity but is flat.  Nevertheless, 
one could now identify the proportion of the population that was eating less than their requirement, 
as those to the left of the line of identity13. 

 
However, obtaining such data (on the intake and requirement of a population) is impractical.  

Therefore, statistical approximations are used to assess the risk of an inadequate intake. One such 
method is the probability approach where a continuous risk curve of probability that any intake is 
inadequate is plotted against the intake value. In this plot, the lower levels of intake will have a 
probability of inadequacy that is close to 100%, and this declines with increasing intakes, such that 
higher levels of intake have a 0% probability of an inadequate intake (Figure 1.2.3). By plotting the 
usual intake distribution against this probability plot, the proportion with the probability of an 
inadequate intake can be determined. 
 

Figure 1.2.2: Theoretical scatter plot of nutrient intake vs requirement* 

 
*The line of identity refers to a situation where nutrient intake matches the requirement. 

 

9 
 



 The ‘EAR cut point method’ is a simplification of the probability method in which the 
proportion of the population with an intake lower than the EAR for the nutrient, are considered to be 
‘at risk for an inadequate intake’. A word of caution is needed for this method, simple as it seems, 
since the following assumptions are made for the EAR cut-off point method: a) the nutrient intakes 
and requirements are independent, b) the 
requirement distribution is symmetrical around Figure 1.2.3: Conceptual figure of risk of 

the EAR, c) the variance intakes is larger than inadequate intake plotted against nutrient 
intake* 

the variance of requirements, d) the true 
prevalence of inadequacy in the population is no 
smaller than 8-10% or no larger than 90-92%.  

 

For nutrients whose distributions violate 
these assumptions, such as iron, adjustments are 
made13. Another example is that of the energy 
requirement, which is closely related to the 
intake. This violates the assumption of 
independence between the intake and 
requirement consequently for energy, a separate 
term, the Estimated Energy Requirement (EER) 
is used; there is no RDA for the energy 
requirement, since the latter would grossly over *At an intake that equals the ANR/EAR, 50% of the 
estimate the requirement. population is theoretically at risk of an inadequate 

 intake. 

1.2.4. Tolerable Upper Limit (TUL) 
 

The TUL is the maximum level of habitual intake from all sources of a nutrient or related 
substance judged to be unlikely to lead to adverse health effects in humans14. An adverse effect is a 
change in morphology, physiology, growth, development, reproduction or lifespan of an organism, 
system, or (sub) population that results in an impairment of functional capacity, an impairment of 
capacity to compensate for additional stress, or an increase in susceptibility to other influences.  The 
potential risk of adverse effects increases after the intake increases above the Upper Limit (UL). The 
TUL applies to chronic daily use and it is important to first assess the characteristics of the individual 
or group, the source of the nutrient, the physiological state of the individual and the duration of 
sustained high intakes. The bioavailability of a nutrient, which is its accessibility to normal metabolic 
and physiological processes, also plays a role in the nature and severity of adverse effects at excessive 
intakes. However, in some cases, the unabsorbed nutrient may also have effects on the lower parts of 
the intestine. This is particularly relevant for iron, in which the unabsorbed iron may have effects on 
the intestinal microbiome. The most appropriate approach is to establish the TUL for age/gender/life 
stage sub-populations, since adverse effects of nutrients are influenced by growth and physiological 
stages. The increased availability and consumption of fortified foods and food supplements has 
sparked concerns about excessive intake of nutrients. It is important to assess the safety of 
fortification by comparing eventual micronutrient intakes with the TUL. High levels of micronutrient 
additions should be avoided even if a micronutrient has no recommended TUL, particularly if there 
is no evidence of derived benefit from levels of intake in excess of the RDA.  

 
Risk assessment is a systematic means of evaluating the probability of occurrence of adverse 

health effects in humans from an excess exposure to an environmental agent14. Risk assessment has 
four stages, including hazard identification, hazard characterisation (through dose-response 
assessment), exposure assessment and risk characterisation. The risk assessment process needs to be 
rigorous and transparent, particularly with regard to the paucity of the data in human populations. 
Almost all of the risk assessments have an inherent uncertainty and variability. Identifying and 

10 
 



accounting for these variabilities and uncertainties is an essential part of the data analysis for 
identifying and characterizing the hazard. Various national and international advisory bodies have 
used the same data, but arrived at different risk assessments due to the different judgments made 
about identifying adverse effects, the nature of uncertainties in the assessment, and in matching the 
upper levels with exposure assessments and dietary reference values. Since, the establishment of 
different upper levels for different nationalities is a source of confusion in public health policy and 
practice, a collaborative development of the model for establishing upper levels of intake for nutrients 
and related substances was proposed by a Joint Task Force of the World Health Organization and the 
Food and Agriculture Organization14.   

 
There are many terms that are used in this context, such as the no-observed- adverse-effect level 

(NOAEL), lowest-observed- adverse- effect level (LOAEL) and uncertainty factor (UF) and the 
acceptable daily intake (ADI).  NOAEL is the highest intake of a nutrient at which no adverse effects 
have been observed in the individuals or groups. LOAEL is the lowest intake at which an adverse 
event has been identified.  UFs are applied to address both the gaps in data and incomplete knowledge.  
There are many scientific uncertainties associated with extrapolating data to the general population, 
from the observed values and several judgements need to be made in deriving uncertainty factor for 
each nutrient. The individual UFs are combined together to arrive at a composite UF for the nutrient.  
The UFs are lower with data of high quality and when adverse effects are mild and reversible. The 
TUL of a nutrient is normally derived by dividing the NOAEL (or LOAEL) by the composite UF15.   

 
The estimation of the LOAEL, NOAEL, and the ADI is based on a well-accepted procedure, in 

which the LOAEL is first determined, based on animal data available. One level below that is the 
NOAEL, and a hundredth of that level is the ADI. In case human adverse event data are used, the 
ADI is usually found to be about one third of the LOAEL. In this framework, the TUL is basically 
ADI, and refers to the quantity of nutrient coming from all dietary and supplementary sources in a 
day. From the viewpoint of dietary fortification of nutrients, it is clear that as the nutrient intake 
progresses beyond the RDA, it could continue to give benefit and this has to be judged based on the 
evidence available. However, this benefit will occur progressively in a smaller proportion of the 
population.  The key point to consider here is the possibility of harm to the general population.  This 
has to be determined for all proposed fortificants. The role of genetics and the environment in altering 
the TUL cannot be dismissed. Finally, it is important to consider the harmonization of methods to 
determine nutrient requirements across countries. This process was considered recently16, and for 
some nutrients, such as vitamin A, the requirements in different countries is quite different. As we 
progress, it is hoped that uniform methods of gathering and evaluating evidence are used.  

11 
 



References 

1. Sauberlich HE, Hodges RE, Wallace DL, Kolder H, Canham JE, Hood J, Raica Jr N, Lowry LK. Vitamin 
A metabolism and requirements in the human studied with the use of labeled retinol. InVitamins & 
Hormones 1975 Jan 1 (Vol. 32, pp. 251-275). Academic Press. 

2. Baker EM, Hodges RE, Hood J, Sauberlich HE, March SC, Canham JE. Metabolism of 14C-and 3H-
labeled L-ascorbic acid in human scurvy. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1971 Apr 1; 
24(4):444-54. 

3. Green R, Charlton R, Seftel H, Bothwell T, Mayet F, Adams B, Finch C, Layrisse M. Body iron excretion 
in man: a collaborative study. The American journal of medicine. 1968 Sep 1; 45(3):336-53. 

4. Heyssel RM, Bozian RC, Darby WJ, Bell MC. Vitamin B12 turnover in man. The assimilation of vitamin 
B12 from natural foodstuff by man and estimates of minimal daily dietary requirements. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition. 1966; 18:176-84. 

5. Etcheverry P, Hawthrone KM, Liang LK, Abrams SA, Griffin IJ:  Effect of beef and soy proteins on the 
absorption of non-heme iron and inorganic zinc in children. J Am CollNutr. 2006; 25: 34-40. 

6. ICMR, Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A Report of the expert 
group of the Indian Council of Medical Research. National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 2010. 

7. King JC, Vorster HH, Tome DG. Nutrient intake values (NIVs): a recommended terminology and 
framework for the derivation of values. Food and Nutrition Bulletin. 2007 Mar; 28(1_suppl1):S16-26. 

8. King JC, Garza C. Harmonization of nutrient intake values. Food and nutrition bulletin. 2007 Mar; 
28(1_suppl1):S3-12. 

9. Meyers LD, Hellwig JP, Otten JJ, editors. Dietary reference intakes: the essential guide to nutrient 
requirements. National Academies Press; 2006 Sep 29. 

10. WHO J. Protein and amino acid requirements in human nutrition. World health organization technical 
report series. 2007(935):1. 

11. FAO F. Nutrition Technical Report Series 1: Human Energy Requirements. Report of a joint 
FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation 2001. Rome FAO, 2004. 

12. Kurpad AV, Thomas T. Methods to assess amino acid requirements in humans. Current Opinion in Clinical 
Nutrition & Metabolic Care. 2011 Sep 1; 14(5):434-9. 

13. Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. 
DRI dietary reference intakes: applications in dietary assessment. Washington (DC): National Academies 
Press (US); 2000. 

14. World Health Organization/Food and Agriculture Organization. A model for establishing upper levels of 
intake for nutrients and related substances. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Technical Workshop on Nutrient 
Risk Assessment. Geneva: WHO/FAO, 2006. 

15. European Food Safety Authority. Tolerable upper intake levels for vitamins and minerals. Scientific 
Committee on Food. 2006. 

16. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Global harmonization of methodological 
approaches to nutrient intake recommendations: Proceedings of a workshop. National Academies Press; 
2018 Jul 29. 

 

12 
 



2.  SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS  
 

Recommended Dietary Allowances &  
Estimated Average Requirements for Indians - 2020  

 

A SHORT REPORT 

REFERENCE BODY WEIGHT 
 

Earlier Expert Committee on RDA used data generated during 1989 on body weights and 
heights of well-to-do Indian children and adolescents, which was based only on a segment of Indian 
population and did not have an all India character. The reference weights for man and woman were 
60 kg and 50 kg respectively.  

 

The 2010 Committee has considered extensive data on anthropometry collected by NNMB/ 
India nutrition profile from 10 states of India for computing reference body weights. Since the data 
collected was from rural India, the committee decided to use the 95th centile values of heights and 
weights for a given age and gender which will be representative of well-nourished population of 
India. For computing RDA for children (0-3y), WHO growth standards for infants and preschool 
children were considered.  

 

The present committee has considered the more recent, nationally representative datasets such 
as the National Family Health Survey - 4 (NFHS-4, 2015-16), National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau 
(NNMB, 2015-16), the World Health Organization (WHO, 2006-07) and the Indian Academy of 
Paediatrics (IAP 2015) to derive acceptable reference body weight values through the lifespan. The 
reference height was taken as 95th centile for adult male and female, and with normal BMI range of  
18.5-22.9 kg/m2, a reference body weight was calculated. 
 

The definition for reference Indian adult man and woman were modified with regard to age (19-
39y instead of 20-39y) and a body weight of 65 kg and 55 kg respectively were fixed for a normal 
BMI. 
 

ENERGY 
 

The factorial approach used for adults in computation of energy requirement by the earlier 
committee is retained. Additionally, the current committee has used Doubly Labelled Water (DLW) 
and heart rate monitoring methods for computation of total energy expenditure for deriving 
requirements as done in the previous recommendations.  

 

The earlier committee used 5% reduction in BMR from FAO/WHO/UNU equations and higher 
PAL values for deriving energy requirements for adults. While the present committee reviewed the 
literature on BMR and PAL based on the evidence, a reduction in the BMR to 10% and 9% for males 
and females respectively with simultaneous reduction in PAL values is proposed. The current 
committee uses the lower ranges of PAL reported by FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004 report. The energy 
requirement for the population >60y of age has been provided as requirements decrease due to a 
reduction in BMR. Because of change in body weight, a proportionate increase in requirement has 
been suggested in pregnancy. As data on pregnant Indian women is unavailable the present committee 
has retained the additional energy requirement proposed by ICMR 2010. In the case of lactation, the 
average energy utilization for milk production based on actual observation is taken into consideration 
and an increase has been suggested. No changes from the previous recommendations have been made 
in the additional requirements of lactating women.  

 

13 
 



The earlier committee had adopted the FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004 equations for deriving the 
energy requirement of infants and children since there was an absence of Indian data and also used 
the body weights reported in the above-mentioned document.  However, the present committee has 
used the WHO child growth standard data for body weight of infants and re-analyzed the energy 
requirement for infants. With the use of these values 1 kcal/kg body weight/d increment of 
requirement for infants aged 0-6 months is reported when compared to the previous 
recommendations. Otherwise the requirement for children above 6 months of age remains the same 
as suggested by the previous committee. Both the previous and the present committee, have 
emphasized the importance of physical activity among children. It is recommended that children 
should be engaged in moderate physical activity. This approach has led to a decrease in energy 
requirement of children. Among children of 13-17 years, there was an increase in requirements on 
account of using same quadratic equation generated from FAO/ WHO/ UNU 2004 to which a higher 
PAL value was used based on a higher physical activity level of Indian children of that age group in 
ICMR, 2010. The same has been retained by the present committee. 

 

PROTEIN 
 

The present Expert Group of the ICMR adopted the following approaches to define the protein 
requirements for Indians of different age groups. A median obligatory nitrogen loss of 48 mg/kg 
(WHO, 2007) has been used to compute mean (0.66 g/kg/day) and safe protein requirements (0.83 
g/kg/day) for healthy Indian adults. Considering high quality protein sources as the premise for 
defining requirements, the present committee has removed the protein digestibility corrections 
(PDCAAS) applied on safe intakes for all age groups.  

 

A newer protein quality index, digestible indispensable amino acid score (DIAAS), which is 
based on true ileal digestibility of individual amino acids has been introduced in the current document. 
Data on true ileal amino acid digestibility values of both high and low quality proteins in Indian adults 
and children, obtained using dual tracer method has been included in the present document. The low 
cost Indian vegetarian diets for sedentary, moderate active man and pregnant woman have been 
modified based on the revised energy requirements. The nutritive values of each food are taken from 
recently published food composition tables (IFCT, 2017). In addition, the protein contents of each 
food group have been corrected for true fecal digestibility values (WHO, 2007) to ensure safe protein 
intakes. The cereal-legume-milk composition of the diet for moderately active man has been 
improved to 3:1:2.5 as compared to the earlier 11:1:3 (ICMR 2010) within a given low cost window 
to meet daily protein requirements. 

 

FATS AND OILS 
 

The FAO/WHO recommendations on fat were taken into account for (i) total fat, individual 
fatty acids and health promoting non-glyceride components (ii) sources of dietary fats in Indians (iii) 
availability of fat and (iv) energy requirements set on the basis of age, physiological status and 
physical activity. The recommendations are directed towards meeting the requirements for optimal 
foetal and infant growth and development, maternal health and combating chronic energy deficiency 
(children and adults) and Diet Related Non-Communicable Diseases (DR-NCD) in adults. There was 
a conscious effort to provide physical activity-based recommendations. Consequently, the visible fat 
intake for sedentary, moderate and heavy activity has been set at 25, 30 and 40 g/d for adult man and 
20, 25 and 30 g/d for adult women as against the single level recommended earlier. To achieve intakes 
of individual fatty acids in Indians that are consistent with FAO/WHO 2008 recommendations the 
types of visible fats and correct combination of vegetable oils to be used for different food 
applications has been also emphasized. There is a realization that efforts to increase the dietary levels 
of total fat and n-3 PUFAs would contribute to lifelong health and well-being. Inclusion of foods 
which provide LCn-3 PUFAs is also recommended for the prevention of DR-NCD.  

14 
 



 

DIETARY FIBER 
 

For the first time committee considered recommendations for fiber based on energy intake and 
the level of about 40 g/2000 kcal has been considered as safe intake. 
 

CARBOHYDRATES 
 

The quantity and quality of CHO are important to maintain good health and have been indicated 
substantially to impact nutrition related chronic disorders/non-communicable diseases (NCDs). For 
the first time recommendations have been made for the dietary intakes of carbohydrates. The EAR 
for CHO has been set at 100 g/day for ages 1 year and above with a RDA of 130 g/day, assuming a 
coefficient of variance (CV) of 15% based on variation in brain glucose utilization.  

 

MINERALS 
 

The present committee has done extensive deliberations on recommendations for minerals like 
calcium, phosphorus, zinc, selenium and iodine and have been included as separate chapters in the 
new document.  
 

Calcium and Phosphorus: Calcium requirement proposed as RDA for adult man and adult woman 
is 1000 mg/d and is 1.5 times the value proposed by earlier expert group i.e., 600 mg/d for adult man 
and woman. For pregnant women, the calcium values proposed is similar to the value proposed for 
adult woman i.e., 1000 mg/d. For lactating woman, an additional amount of 200 mg is added to EAR 
of 800 mg and a total of 1000 mg has been set as EAR and adding 10% CV, the RDA is set at 1200 
mg. For post-menopausal women the recommendation is 1200 mg/d. 
 

 The recommended values for phosphorus for all age groups except for infants are 1:1 ratio with 
calcium. For infants, it is 1.5 times the value recommended for calcium. 
 

Magnesium: EAR was calculated by extrapolating the regression equation from the correlation of 
intakes and fecal losses and adding the average urinary losses. RDAs were calculated from EARs 
with 10% coefficient of variation. Requirements of other physiological groups were adjusted to age 
and growth factors. The EAR was thus estimated to 320 mg per day and RDA at 385 mg per day for 
adult males. 
 

Sodium and Potassium: Specific recommendations have been made on adequate intakes for sodium 
and potassium for adult man and woman based on WHO (2012) recommendation. With regard to 
sodium due to emerging concerns on prevalence of hypertension a safe intake of 2000 mg/day which 
amounts to 5 g/day of salt is recommended; while an intake of 3510 mg/day is recommended for 
potassium. The desirable sodium:potassium ratio in mmol from the diet was fixed at 1:1. 
 

Iron: The basis for the recommendations of iron (factorial approach) is similar to what was adopted 
by the previous committee. Unlike the earlier Committee which used three tier absorption for 
adjustment of dietary iron 3% for men, 5% for women and 8% for pregnant women, the present 
Committee recommends the use of only two tiers 5% (men and children) and 8% (all women), which 
is in conformity with the suggestion made by FAO/WHO, for developing countries and is also based 
on absorption data generated in India using stable isotopes. Consequently, the average requirement 
RDA for iron has been reduced significantly among all physiological groups. To achieve this, the 
committee recommended that the density of ascorbic acid in the daily diet should be at least 20 mg/ 
1000 kcal. 
 

Zinc: Computation of zinc requirements was done considering all the average losses of zinc through 
bodily fluids and additional requirements due to growth (tissue and blood volume expansion), 
lactation, pregnancy needs. The absolute requirements were then adjusted for bioavailability to derive 

15 
 



EAR. From the EAR, RDA for adult man and woman is set at 17 and 13 mg/day respectively and 
specific recommendations for all physiological groups are included in this report.  
 

Copper, Chromium and Manganese: The RDA for Cu, Cr and Mn have been considered separately 
in view of their importance and a brief account of relevant information on the nutritional significance 
and suggested adequate dietary intakes for adults are  provided in this report.  
 

Selenium: The present Committee recommended 40 µg/day as adequate intake of selenium. 
 

Iodine: Based on intake of Iodine in the diet through food and as fortified salt, the recommendation 
of 150 µg/day is retained for adults. The recommendations of IOM of 250 µg/day for Iodine during 
pregnancy, have also been adopted. 
 

VITAMINS 

Water Soluble Vitamins 

Thiamine and Riboflavin: The daily intake of these vitamins is related to the energy requirements. 
In the absence of direct studies, the committee recommends the requirements of thiamine (men- 0.6 
mg/1000 kcal; women- 0.8 mg/1000 kcal) and riboflavin (men- 0.9 mg/1000 kcal; women- 1.1 mg/ 
1000 kcal) based on ETK-AC (1.15) and EGR-AC cut-off values (1.2), respectively for thiamine and 
riboflavin.  
 

Niacin: Diet surveys from India show that the average intake of niacin is around 10 mg daily. Based 
on the EAR of 5.6 mg/1000 Kcals for adults, which was derived by urinary metabolite studies of 
niacin, 10% CV (20% 2SD) was added to EAR to derive the RDA. Individual requirements were 
computed based on energy requirements. The EAR (RDA) was set at 12 mg/day (14 mg/day) and 9 
mg/day (11 mg/day) for sedentary men and women respectively.  
 

Vitamin B6: Due to paucity of reference data for different age groups in Indian scenario, expert 
committee 2020 calculated the vitamin B6 EAR and RDA based on EAST-AC values for adults. For 
this the EAST-AC cut-off of 1.8 was considered as suggested by EFSA and the requirements were 
calculated based on regression analysis in relation to B6 intakes. Based on this approach the 
requirement (EAR) of vitamin B6 for 1000 kcal works out to be 0.616 mg and this was used to 
extrapolate to other age groups based on the energy requirements. The RDA was set at 2.1 and 1.6 
for moderate active men and women respectively. 
 

Folate: The present committee revised the requirements of folate based on some recent Indian data, 
which includes dietary intakes, and plasma folate and homocysteine levels as functional marker. 
Based on the available data on serum/plasma folate and the dietary folate intake among healthy Indian 
adults, the EAR was derived. The requirement to maintain normal plasma folate levels of >10=; 
nmol/L was considered and the RDA was calculated as 300 µg for adult men and 220 µg for adult 
women. Additional requirements of 300 µg/day and 100 µg/day were added respectively during 
pregnancy and lactation for meeting the factorial extra needs. 
 

Vitamin B12: Factorial approach was used for deriving Vitamin B12 requirements and the mean daily 
excretion used in the previous ICMR 2010 recommendation, of 1 μg/d, was considered.  Using mean 
bioavailability of 50% based on stable isotope kinetic studies done at St. John’s Research Institute, 
an EAR of 2 μg/d for adults is recommended. Distribution of the requirement was calculated based 
on distribution of bioavailability, and the 97.5th percentile of this distribution was used to define RDA 
of 2.5 μg/d. For young children, as no specific data is available, an intake of 1 μg/day is suggested 
keeping in view of low prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency observed in 1-4y old children in the 
Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS); and for school children and adolescents the adult 
requirement is suggested. For pregnant women, since studies have shown that the human foetus 
accumulates 0.1 μg/d and is required for maintaining adequate foetal growth, an additional EAR of 

16 
 



0.2 μg B12/d is suggested adjusting for 50% absorption. With regards to lactating women the B12 
requirement was arrived by considering the B12 content of milk and the output in first 6 months, which 
is around 0.4 μg/d.  Adjusting for absorption an additional EAR of 0.8 μg/d is suggested. 
 

Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C): The committee has evaluated all the available evidence on this subject 
and estimated the EAR and RDA based on replacement levels of body pool saturation of 900 mg, for 
a metabolic loss of 2.9% per day, compensated for the urinary loss (25% per day), taking absorption 
efficiency in Indian foods also into consideration. The EAR was set at 65mg per day and RDA at 80 
mg per day for adult males. Due importance of ascorbic acid in a meal to improve iron absorption 
among Indians on a vegetarian diet is also emphasized while making the recommendations. 
 

Fat Soluble Vitamins 

Vitamin A: The present Committee revised the carotene conversion ratio to account for tissue 
conversion, based on recent knowledge, and a general conversion factor of 6:1 is recommended for 
all carotenoids except β-cryptoxanthine and α-carotene where a CF of 12:1 is recommended.  Vitamin 
A requirements (RDA) for all groups were also revised upwards using factorial computation method.  

 Considering the recent studies on vitamin A status carried out in India, an upward revision of 
retinol to 900 µg is recommended during pregnancy. To ensure adequacy at least in vulnerable groups 
like pregnant and lactating women, the Committee has recommended that a minimum of 50% RE be 
drawn from animal sources.  
 

Vitamin D: The Committee after considering the available evidence of vitamin D status decided to 
adopt the IOM recommendation for all age groups. Accordingly an EAR of 400 IU and an RDA of 
600 IU is recommended while emphasizing the importance of outdoor physical activity as a means 
of achieving adequate vitamin D status in a tropical country like India. 
 

Vitamin E & K: The requirement of alpha tocopherol suggested is 0.8 mg/ g of dietary essential fatty 
acids. This roughly works out to 7.5-10 mg tocopherol per day, similar to FAO/WHO 
recommendations depending on the edible oil used. The recommendation for vitamin K is 55 μg for 
adults and is in tune with recommendations of FAO/WHO. 
 
WATER  
 

The requirement of water was estimated based on a factorial approach, utilising the existing 
literature of the fluid guidelines provided by the IOM and WHO, with corrections made for body 
mass and energy requirement to suit the Indian context. The water required from beverages for adult 
man ranges from 32-58 ml per kg body mass and for woman, it ranges from 27-52 ml per kg body 
mass, with sedentary working group at lower end and the heavy working group at higher end of the 
range. For children, the requirement is greater than 60 ml per kg body mass and for adolescent boys 
it ranges from 47-60 ml per kg body mass, while, for girls it is 39-49 ml per kg body mass. For 
pregnant woman, based on the working intensity, the water required from beverages ranges from 2.1 
to 3.2 litres per day. For old-age, irrespective of gender, the present consensus for water requirement 
from beverages is 33 ml per kg body mass for sedentary activity and 38 ml per kg body mass for 
moderate activity. 
 
ANTIOXIDANTS 
 

Realising the importance of dietary antioxidants, the committee deliberated on the information 
on consumption of antioxidants and recommended a minimum of 400 g/day of fruits and vegetables 
to obtain sufficient amounts of antioxidant nutrients such as beta-carotene, vitamin C and certain non-
nutrients like polyphenols and flavonoids which may protect against chronic diseases. This should be 
complemented with sufficient amount of vegetable oil so as to obtain vitamin E. 

17 
 



 

SUMMARY OF EAR FOR INDIANS - 2020 
 

Fats/ Oils 
Body Energy Cal Magne Ribo Vit Vit Vit Vit Vit 

(visible) Protein CHO Iron Zinc Iodine Thiamine Niacin Folate 
Age Category Wt (**) cium sium flavin B6 B12 C A D 

(#) 
Group of work 

(Kcal/ (mg  (mg/ (mg/  (µg/ (mg/ (mg/  (mg  (mg/ (µg  (µg/ (mg/ (µg/ (IU  
(kg) (g/d) (g/d) (g/d) (mg/ d) 

d) /d) d) d) day) d) d) /d) d) /d) d) d) d) /d) 

Sedentary 2110 25  1.2 1.6 12 1.6 
65 

Men Moderate 2710 30 42.9 100 800 320 11 14.0 95 1.5 2.1 15 2.1 250 2 65 460 400 
 

Heavy 3470 40  1.9 2.7 19 2.6 

Sedentary 1660 20  1.1 1.6 9 1.6 

Moderate 55 2130 25 36.3 100 800 270 15 11.0 95 1.4 2.0 12 1.6 180 2 55 390 400 

Heavy 2720 30  1.8 2.6 15 2.1 

+7.6 

(2nd 
55 

Pregnant trimester) 
Women + + 350 30 135 800 320 32 12.0 180 1.6 2.3 +2 1.9 480 +0.2 +10 406 400 

woman +17.6 
10 

(3rd 

trimester) 
Lactation 

+600 +13.6 155 1.7 2.5 +4 +0.22 280 
0-6m 

  30   1000 270 16 12.0 200      +0.8 +40 720 400 
 

+520 +10.6 155 1.7 2.4 +4 +0.16 280 
7-12m 

0-6 m* 5.8 550 - 6.7 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Infants 

6-12m 8.5 670 25 8.8 - - - 2 2.0 130 - - - 0.5 71 1 - 170 - 

1-3y 11.7 1010 25 9.2 100 400 111 6 2.5 65 0.6 0.8 6 0.8 90 1 22 180 

Children 4-6y 18.3 1360 25 12.8 100 450 131 8 3.7 80 0.8 1.1 8 1.0 111 1 27 240 400 

7-9 y 25.3 1700 30 19.0 100 500 178 10 4.9 80 1.0 1.3 10 1.3 142 2 36 290 

Boys 10-12y 34.9 2220 35 26.2 100 650 223 12 7.0 100 1.3 1.7 12 1.7 180 2 45 360 400 

Girls 10-12y 36.4 2060 45 26.6 100 650 214 16 7.1 100 1.2 1.6 12 1.6 186 2 44 370 400 

Boys 13-15y 50.5 2860 50 36.4 100 800 294 15 11.9 100 1.6 2.2 16 2.2 238 2 60 430 400 

Girls 13-15y 49.6 2400 35 34.7 100 800 270 17 10.7 100 1.3 1.9 13 1.8 204 2 55 420 400 

Boys 16-18y 64.4 3320 40 45.1 100 850 338 18 14.7 100 1.9 2.5 19 2.5 286 2 69 480 400 

Girls 16-18y 55.7 2500 35 37.3 100 850 279 18 11.8 100 1.4 1.9 14 1.9 223 2 57 400 400 

*: AI;  **: There is no RDA for energy.  The EAR is equivalent to the Estimated Energy Requirement (EER); #: Visible fat requirement is in proportion to EER; 
 
 
 

18 
 



 

SUMMARY OF RDA FOR INDIANS – 2020 
 

Body 
Cal Magne Ribo Vit Vit Vit Vit Vit 

Wt Protein CHO Iron Zinc Iodine Thiamine Niacin Folate 
Age Category cium sium flavin B6 B12 C A D 

Group of work 
(mg/ (mg (mg/ (mg (µg/ (mg (mg (mg (mg/ (µg (µg/  (mg/ (µg/     (IU/  

(kg) (g/d) (g/d) 
d) /d) d) /d) day) /d) /d) /d) d) /d) d) d) d) d) 

Sedentary 1.4 2.0 14 1.9 
Men Moderate 65 54.0 130 1000 385 19 17 150 1.8 2.5 18 2.4 300 2.5 80 1000 600 

Heavy 2.3 3.2 23 3.1 
Sedentary 1.4 1.9 11 1.9 
Moderate 55 45.7 130 1000 325 29 13.2 150 1.7 2.4 14 1.9 220 2.5 65 840 600 
Heavy 2.2 3.1 18 2.4 

+9.5 
(2nd 

55 
Pregnant trimester) 

+ 175 1000 385 40 14.5 250 2.0 2.7 +2.5 2.3 570 +0.25 +15 900 600 
Women woman +22.0 

10 
(3rd 

trimester) 
Lactation 

+16.9 200 2.1 3.0 +5 +0.26 330 
0-6m 

   1200 325 23 14 280      +1.0 +50 950 600 
 

+13.2 200 2.1 2.9 +5 +0.17 330 
7-12m 

0-6 m* 5.8 8.1 55 300  30 - - 100 0.2 0.4 2 0.1 25 1.2 20 350 400 
Infants 

6-12m 8.5 10.5 95 300 75 3 2.5 130 0.4 0.6 5 0.6 85 1.2 27 350 400 

1-3y 11.7 11.3 130 500 135 8 3.0 90 0.7 0.9 7 0.9 110 1.2 27 390 
Children 4-6y 18.3 15.9 130 550 155 11 4.5 120 0.9 1.3 9 1.2 135 1.2 32 510 600 

7-9 y 25.3 23.3 130 650 215 15 5.9 120 1.1 1.6 11 1.5 170 2.5 43 630 
Boys 10-12y 34.9 31.8 130 850 270 16 8.5 150 1.5 2.1 15 2.0 220 2.5 54 770 600 
Girls 10-12y 36.4 32.8 130 850 255 28 8.5 150 1.4 1.9 14 1.9 225 2.5 52 790 600 
Boys 13-15y 50.5 44.9 130 1000 355 22 14.3 150 1.9 2.7 19 2.6 285 2.5 72 930 600 
Girls 13-15y 49.6 43.2 130 1000 325 30 12.8 150 1.6 2.2 16 2.2 245 2.5 66 890 600 
Boys 16-18y 64.4 55.4 130 1050 405 26 17.6 150 2.2 3.1 22 3.0 340 2.5 82 1000 600 
Girls 16-18y 55.7 46.2 130 1050 335 32 14.2 150 1.7 2.3 17 2.3 270 2.5 68 860 600 

* AI 

 

 

 
 
 
 

19 
 



 

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED INTAKES FOR  
OTHER MINERALS AND TRACE ELEMENTS 

 

SNo. Minerals/Trace Element Recommended intake 

1 Phosphorous 1000 mg/day 

2 Sodium 2000 mg/day 

3 Potassium 3500 mg/day 

4 Copper 2 mg/day 

5 Manganese 4 mg/day 

6 Chromium 50 µg/day 

7 Selenium 40 µg/day 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
20 

 



 

TOLERABLE UPPER LIMIT (TUL) FOR NUTRIENTS  
 

Cal Magne
Protein Iron Zinc Iodine Niacin Vit. B6 Folate Vit. C Vit. A Vit. D 

Age Category cium sium 
Group of work (PE (mg/ (mg (mg/ (mg (µg/ 

(mg/d) (mg/ d) (µg/d) (mg/d) (µg/d) (IU/d) 
ratio) d) /d) d) /d)  day) 

Sedentary 
Men Moderate <40% 2500 350 45 40 1100 1000 2000 3000 

Heavy 
35 100 4000 

Sedentary 
Moderate <40% 2500 350 45 40 1100 1000 2000 3000 
Heavy 
Pregnant 

Women <30% 2500 350 45 40 1100 - - 1000 2000 3000 4000 
woman 
Lactation 
0-6m <40% 2500 350 45 40 1100 - - 1000 2000 3000 4000 
7-12m 

0-6 m <15% – - 40 4 - - - - - 600$ 1000 
Infants 

6-12m <15% – - 40 5 - - - - - 600$ 1500 

1-3y <15% 1500 65 40 7 200 - 350 600$ 2500 
Children 4-6y <15% 2500 110 40 12 300 - - - 550 900$ 3000 

7-9 y <15% 2500 110 40 12 400 300 800 900$ 3000 
600-800 

Boys 10-12y <15% 3000 350 40 23 600 - - 1050 1700 4000 
(9-17y) 

Girls 10-12y <15% 3000 350 40 23 600 - - - 1300 1700 4000 
Boys 13-15y <15% 3000 350 45 34 900 - - - 1550 2800 4000 
Girls 13-15y <15% 3000 350 45 34 900 - - - 1800 2800 4000 
Boys 16-18y <15% 3000 350 45 34 1100 - - - 1950 2800 4000 
Girls 16-18y <15% 3000 350 45 34 1100 - - - 2000 2800 4000 

 

$: adopted from IOM 

21 
 



3.  REFERENCE BODY WEIGHTS 
 
 

 
Age, gender, body-structure (height and weight) and body tissue composition largely determine 

the nutrient requirement of an individual. In growing infants, children, adolescents and adults the 
body weight, height and tissue composition are indicators of their health and nutritional status. The 
nutrient requirements are thus adjusted for body weight (a proxy for the built of an individual) in 
kilograms to account for the wide variation in body sizes observed at a population level. A reference 
body weight represents what is optimal for age and sex, of an apparently healthy representative 
population with favourable conditions for growth and development. 

  

 The Expert Committee of the ICMR (1989) used anthropometric data of an elite population 
of India. These data were generated by NIN surveys on children from high socio-economic 
backgrounds, those studying in public schools or in IIT’s in different parts of the country1,2.  In 2010, 
the ICMR expert committee decided to use data on height and weight from the National Nutrition 
Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) surveys carried out in the year 2000-01, from rural households across 9 
states, in order to have a representative data set for the Indian population. The 95th centile values of 
weights and heights for a given age and sex, from this national survey, were taken to be representative 
of a well-nourished population and considered as reference values for India. These weights were used 
to compute the RDA of nutrients (per kg body weight per day), for all age and gender groups, except 
for children (0-3 years). For children 0-3 years, the WHO standard (2006) for weight and height was 
used3. 

 

The present committee has considered an alternative approach to define the reference body 
weight for the Indian population. The currently available, nationally representative datasets such as 
the National Family Health Survey - 4 (NFHS-4, 2015-16), National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau 
(NNMB, 2015-16), the World Health Organization (WHO, 2006-07), and the Indian Academy of 
Pediatrics (IAP 2015) were evaluated to arrive at acceptable reference body weight values through 
the lifespan. The details are explained in the following sections. 
 
3.1 – Comparison of anthropometric data from national datasets 
 

To define the reference body weights for the population, the ICMR-NIN 2020 expert committee 
used or compared different datasets with height and weight measurements in different age groups. 
 

3.1.1 Children aged 0-5y 
 

For the age range from 0-5y, the WHO growth standard was selected, since an Indian city (New 
Delhi) was included in the multicenter assessment.  The WHO data was from the multi-center growth 
reference study (MGRS, 0-60 months)3. 
 

3.1.2 School children and adolescents 
 

For school children and adolescents, the WHO growth standards (2006-07) and the revised IAP 
growth standards (2015) were compared. The WHO data was from the National Center for Health 
Statistics (5-18y, NCHS, 1977) dataset4. The IAP presented revised growth charts for children and 
adolescents (5-18 y) in 2015, with data from upper and middle socio-economic status children from 
14 different cities5. The body weights and heights from these datasets are provided in Table 3.1 and 
3.2.  
  

22 
 



Table 3.1: Body weights (kg) of children and adolescents (5-18y)                                               
reported from IAP and WHO growth standards 

Age (y) Boys Girls 
IAP 2015 WHO 2007 IAP 2015 WHO 2007 

5 17.1 18.5 16.4 18.3 
6 19.3 20.5 18.7 20.2 
7 21.9 22.9 21.2 22.4 
8 24.8 25.4 24.0 25.0 
9 27.9 28.1 27.2 28.2 
10 31.1 31.2 31.0 31.9 
11 34.7 34.6 35.4 36.2 
12 39.0 38.9 39.8 41.1 
13 43.3 44.3 43.6 46.0 
14 48.2 50.6 46.4 50.1 
15 53.1 56.5 48.4 52.8 
16 56.8 61.3 49.7 54.7 
17 59.5 64.8 50.9 55.7 
18 61.6 67.3 52.0 56.7 

 

 

Table 3.2: Height (cm) of children and adolescents (5-18y) reported from                                
IAP and WHO datasets 

Age (y) Boys Girls 
IAP 2015 WHO 2007 IAP 2015 WHO 2007 

5 108.9 110 107.5 110 
6 114.8 116 113.5 115 
7 120.7 122 119.4 121 
8 126.4 127 125.4 127 
9 131.8 133 131.4 133 
10 137.2 138 137.4 139 
11 142.7 143 143.3 145 
12 148.4 149 148.4 151 
13 154.3 156 152.2 156 
14 159.9 163 154.7 160 
15 164.5 169 155.5 162 
16 168.1 173 156.9 163 
17 171.0 175 157.4 163 
18 173.6 176 157.8 163 

 

The 3rd, 50th and 97th percentiles values for body weights were plotted against age (Figure 
3.1), which showed a considerable overlap between the IAP and WHO data, suggesting that either of 
these datasets could be used as reference for the Indian population.  

 

23 
 



Figure 3.1: Comparison of IAP and WHO reference body weights for                                       
children and adolescents (5-18y) 

 
Legend: The line represents mean body weights (kg) and shaded areas represent the range between 3rd and 
97th percentiles for each reference 
 
3.1.2.1 Sensitivity analyses with macro- and micronutrient requirement 
 

To test the comparability of references derived from either of these data sets, sensitivity analyses 
for the energy and iron requirement (to represent macro- and micro-nutrient requirements 
respectively) were performed, using body weights of 5-18 y from both databases. Figure 3.2 shows 
the mean (confidence interval, 95%CI) of the energy requirement respectively for ages 5-18 y, when 
IAP or WHO body weights were used as the reference.  

 
The difference in the energy requirement ranged from 0 to 160 kcal/d across ages, which was 

less than 5% of average daily requirement of energy for each age. The slightly higher difference at 
higher ages was due to corresponding increased body weights as per the WHO reference. For the iron 
requirement, the same analysis showed that the difference in requirement ranged from 0.2 to 1.6 mg/d 
across ages for boys while for girls it ranged from 0.2 to 1.1 mg/d, which was less than 5% of the 
daily iron requirement for 5-14y. From 15-18y, this difference was less than 8%.The slightly higher 
difference at higher ages was because at these ages, the IAP reference weights were lower compared 
to the WHO reference. To err on the side of caution, since these were small differences, it was decided 
to use the WHO reference values for children and adolescents. 
 
 
 

24 
 



Figure 3.2: Comparison of energy requirement for children and                                          
adolescents based on IAP and WHO body weights 

 

 
Legend: The line represents the energy requirement (kcal/d) and shaded region represents 95% CI  

3.1.3 Adults 
 

Anthropometric data for Indian adults are available from two recent national datasets, the 
NNMB (2015-16) and the NFHS-46,7. The NFHS-4 provides information on population’s health and 
nutritional status across Indian states and Union territories. The NNMB survey was conducted on 
urban population from 16 states - Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam, Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, Bihar, Rajasthan, Puducherry and Delhi8. The main objective of the survey was to assess the 
diet and nutritional status of urban population and define the prevalence of obesity, hypertension, 
diabetes and dyslipidaemia among urban men and women. The anthropometric measurements are 
available for all individuals in 3600 households. From these data, the reference height was taken as 
95th centile for adult male and female, and with normal BMI range of 18.5-22.9 kg/m2, the reference 
body weight was calculated (Table 3.3 and 3.4). 
 

Table 3.3: Data on height (cm) of adult Indian population derived from                           
NNMB urban survey 2016 

Males Females 
Age (y) 

n Mean Median 95th n Mean Median 95th 
19-29 13000 167.2 167.5 178.8 15888 153.1 153.1 163.2 
30-39 12401 166.2 166.4 177.5 16436 152.4 152.4 162.2 
40-49 11758 165.1 165.2 176.0 14584 151.8 151.8 161.4 
50-59 8622 164.1 164.2 175.0 405 151.7 151.7 160.5 

60 & Above 8457 162.3 162.5 173.1 109 149.4 149.0 160.8 

25 
 



Table 3.4: Reference heights and weights for adult males and females 
 

Valid Proposed 
Gender Measure Mean SD Median 95th 

N reference 
Height 170 177.5 0.3 177.5 178.0 177.0 

Male Weight 170 65.4 4.0 65.6 71.8 65.0 
BMI 170 20.78 1.27 20.83 22.76 20.75 
Height 184 162.4 0.3 162.4 163.0 162.0 

Female Weight 184 54.7 3.5 54.7 60.0 55.0 
BMI 184 20.74 1.33 20.73 22.75 20.95 

 
Note: The reference body weight was calculated based on reference height derived from NNMB urban survey 
2016 (177-178 cm for male and 162-163 cm for female) and BMI in the range of 18.5-22.9 kg/m2 

 

Further, to validate the use of the NNMB data, a population subset was selected from the NFHS-
4(2015-16) dataset using a strict criterion based on wealth, education, Body Mass Index (BMI), Blood 
Pressure (BP) and blood parameters like haemoglobin (Hb) and sugar levels to define an apparently 
healthy population. A regression equation for body weight using the predictors such as wealth index, 
year of education, Body Mass Index (BMI), anaemia (measured using Hb), blood sugar, blood 
pressure and age was developed, which explained 85% variation of body weight for males and 78% 
for females. The reference body weight was estimated from this regression equation for different 
ages, setting wealth index at the richest class, year of education at graduation level, BMI as 21 kg/m2, 
Hb at 12 g/dl for female and 13 g/dl for male, normal BP levels and blood sugar at 100 mg/dl.  

 

The predicted body weights (confidence interval) were found to be 54.1 (3.3) kg and 64.4 (3.91) 
kg for females and males respectively. The predicted reference body weight for males and female 
from NFHS-4 was similar to the proposed body weights using NNMB data, therefore the NNMB data 
was considered for reference body weights as it is the most recent available dataset. 

 

3.2   Reference body weights 
 

 The present expert committee recommended the use of WHO reference body weights for 
children from 0-18 y, as substantiated by the IAP and WHO comparison and sensitivity analysis for 
energy and iron requirement, and in confirmation with international standards.  

 
For adult women and men, the weight derived from a normal BMI range (18.5-22.9kg/m2) for 

the 95% height, from the NNMB data was selected, as the values predicted from the NFHS-4 data 
were similar to these measured values. The summary of recommended body weights across ages is 
presented in Table 3.5. Since the requirements are grouped for different ages, a summary of body 
weights for different age groups is present in the Table 3.6. Reference body weight for normal BMI 
(21) for corresponding height is given in Table 3.7. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 



Table 3.5: Recommended body weights Table 3.6: Reference body weights for 
across ages for Indian population Indian population in specified age groups 

 

Body Weight (kg) 
Category Age (y) Body weights 

Age Group Category 
Boys Girls (kg) 

0-6 m 6.1 5.6 
Infants Men >18 y 65.0 

6-12 m 8.8 8.2 
1 10.9 10.2 Women >18 y 55.0 

2 13.3 12.7 0-6 m 5.8 
Infants 

3 15.3 15.0 6-12m 8.5 
4 16.5 16.0 

Children 5 18.5 18.3 1-3y 11.7 

6 20.5 20.2 Children 4-6y 18.3 
7-9 y 25.3 

7 22.9 22.4 
8 25.4 25.0 Boys 10-12y 34.9 
9 28.1 28.2 Girls 10-12y 36.4 
10 31.2 31.9 

Boys 13-15y 50.5 
11 34.6 36.2 
12 38.9 41.1 Girls 13-15y 49.6 

13 44.3 46.0 Boys 16-18y 64.4 

Adolescents 14 50.6 50.1 Girls 16-18y 55.7 
15 56.5 52.8  

16 61.3 54.7    

17 64.8 55.7 
18 67.3 56.7 

Adult Men >18 65.0 

Adult Women >18 55.0 

27 
 



Table 3.7: Recommended weights for corresponding heights at BMI=21 
 

Height (cm) Weight (Kg)  Height (cm) Weight (Kg) 

130 35.5 161 54.4 

131 36.0 162 55.1 

132 36.6 163 55.8 

133 37.1 164 56.5 

134 37.7 165 57.2 

135 38.3 166 57.9 

136 38.8 167 58.6 

137 39.4 168 59.3 

138 40.0 169 60.0 

139 40.6 170 60.7 

140 41.2 171 61.4 

141 41.8 172 62.1 

142 42.3 173 62.9 

143 42.9 174 63.6 

144 43.5 175 64.3 

145 44.2 176 65.0 

146 44.8 177 65.8 

147 45.4 178 66.5 

148 46.0 179 67.3 

149 46.6 180 68.0 

150 47.3 181 68.8 

151 47.9 182 69.6 

152 48.5 183 70.3 

153 49.2 184 71.1 

154 49.8 185 71.9 

155 50.5 186 72.7 

156 51.1 187 73.4 

157 51.8 188 74.2 

158 52.4 189 75.0 

159 53.1 190 75.8 

160 53.8   

 

  

28 
 



References 

1. Raghavan KV, Singh D, Swaminathan MC. Heights and weights of well-nourished Indian school 
children. Indian Journal of Medical Research. 1971; 59(4):648-54. 

2. Rao DH, Satyanarayana K, Sastry JG. Growth pattern of well-to-do Hyderabad pre-school children. 
Indian Journal of Medical Research. 1976; 64(5):629-38. 

3. World Health Organization. WHO child growth standards: length/height-for-age, weight-for-age, 
weight-for-length, weight-for-height and body mass index-for-age: methods and development. World 
Health Organization; 2006. 

4. World Health Organization. WHO reference 2007: growth reference data for 5-19 years. World Health 
Organization; 2007.  

5. Khadilkar V, Yadav S, Agrawal KK, Tamboli S, Banerjee M, Cherian A, Goyal JP, Khadilkar A, 
Kumaravel V, Mohan V, Narayanappa D. Revised IAP growth charts for height, weight and body mass 
index for 5-to 18-year-old Indian children. Indian pediatrics. 2015 Jan 1; 52(1):47-55. 

6. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau. Diet and nutritional status of rural population. National Nutrition 
Monitoring Bureau Technical Report No. 21. 2002.  

7. IIPS I. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4), 2015–16. International Institute for Population 
Sciences (IIPS), Mumbai, India. 2017. 

8. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau. Diet and nutritional status of rural population. National Nutrition 
Monitoring Bureau Technical Report No. 21. 2002. 

 

29 
 



4.  ENERGY  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Body needs energy for maintaining body temperature and metabolic activity and for supporting 
physical work and growth. Energy is a fuel provided by the macronutrients consumed in the diet: 
carbohydrate, fat and protein and in some instances, alcohol. The recommended energy allowances are 
designed to provide sufficient energy that will support satisfactory growth in infants and children and 
maintain appropriate body size and composition associated with good health in adults. The factors which 
influence energy needs are age, gender, body size, level of physical activity and, to some extent, climate 
and altered physiological status such as pregnancy and lactation.  

 
To maintain energy balance, energy intake must be equal to the energy output, which 

corresponds to a steady state, and results in a stable and healthy body weight. The logical extension 
of this concept is that if the stable body weight and level of physical activity of an individual are 
known or defined, then energy balance can be achieved at a single level of intake; the additional needs 
of the individual (as in the case of children, or during pregnancy and lactation) can be taken care of 
by specific additional prescribed allowances. This level of intake of an individual, at which he/she 
remains in steady state or in energy balance, maintaining predetermined levels of body weight and 
physical activity, is considered to be the individual’s energy requirement. It is not essential that a 
person should be in energy balance on a day-to-day basis. However, over a period of a week or a 
fortnight, the individual can be in energy balance, that is, his/her daily energy expenditure and daily 
energy intake averaged over this period should be in a state of balance. Fat, the body’s energy store, 
can take care of any imbalance in daily energy intake and energy expenditure. This definition of 
individual’s energy requirement can then be extended to spell out the energy needs of a group (or a 
community or a nation), if the composition of the community, age, gender, body weight and habitual 
pattern of physical activity are known. On the other hand, excess energy is stored in the body leading 
to positive energy balance and eventually causing overweight or obesity. 

 
The basic concept of estimating energy requirements is fundamentally different from that of 

protein and other nutrients. Unlike energy, protein is not stored in the body as a reserve and the daily 
protein intake should match the daily protein metabolism to satisfy a man’s daily protein 
requirements. Further, the recommended dietary intake of protein and other nutrients is given as either 
the Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) or the safe allowance, which is called the Recommended 
Daily Intake (RDI), and which covers additional allowances demanded by intra-individual and inter-
individual variations. The RDA is an intake at which the risk of inadequacy is less than 2.5%. In the 
case of energy, however, since energy can be stored as fat when its intake is in excess of the 
requirement, only the average requirement is used, called the Estimated Energy Requirement (EER). 
The requirement represents the average daily requirements corresponding to daily average energy 
expenditure of an individual. 
 

4.1. Energy requirement: Definition and units  
  
The energy requirement of an individual is defined as follows: 
 

 The level of energy intake from food that balances energy expenditure when the individual has 
a body size and composition and level of physical activity, consistent with long-term good health, 
also allowing for maintenance of economically essential and socially desirable activity. In children 
and pregnant and lactating women, it includes the energy needs associated with the deposition of 
tissues during growth, or secretion of milk at rates consistent with good health1. 

30 
 



 

 The unit of energy, which has been in use in nutrition for a long time, is Kilocalories (kcal). 
However, recently the International Union of Sciences and International Union of Nutritional 
Sciences (IUNS) have adopted ‘Joule’ as the unit of energy in the place of kcal. These units are 
defined as follows. 
 

Joule, a physical unit of energy, is defined as the energy required to move 1kg of mass by 1 meter by 
a force of 1 Newton acting on it (One Newton is the force needed to accelerate one kg mass by 1 
meter per sec2).  
 

Kilo calories (kcal) is defined as the heat required to raise the temperature of one kg of water by 1C 
from 14.5C to 15.5C. The unit kcal is still popularly used. Both units are used in defining human 
energy requirement in this report.  

The relationship between the two units of energy is as follows: 
 

 1 kcal   = 4.184 KJ (Kilo Joule) 
 1KJ  =  0.239 kcal 
 1000 kcal  = 4184 KJ = 4.18 MJ (Mega Joule) 
 1 MJ   =  239 kcal 
  
4.2. Requirements of energy for Indians – A history  
 

 The recommended dietary allowances of energy for Indians were first proposed by the Nutrition 
Advisory Committee (NAC) of the Indian Research Fund Association (IRFA) in 19442. These 
recommendations were based on the proposals of the Health Committee of the League of Nations 
made in 1935 but adapted to the lower body weights of Indian adults which were assumed to be 55 
kg and 45 kg for the male and female respectively. The 1944 recommendations for energy for Indians2 
were revised subsequently by the NAC of the ICMR in 19583. The factorial approach (refer section 
4.4) employed in deriving the energy requirements of Indian adults in 1958 was similar to that used 
by the 1957 FAO/WHO Expert Group on Energy Requirements4. For this purpose, the normal man 
and woman were defined to be of 55 kg and 45 kg body weight respectively and the total daily energy 
requirements were defined for three categories of activities, namely, sedentary, moderate and heavy. 
These requirements were derived by employing the factorial approach. These energy requirements of 
Indian adult man were computed using both Indian and Western data. While the available data on 
Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR)5,6 of Indians were used for computing the energy cost of sleep, the 
activity component from different daily activities was, however, computed from extensive Western 
data on energy cost of different activities, since data available then on Indian subjects were limited. 
Even these limited observations available then on Indians for energy cost of activities, when adjusted 
for differences in body weights, were comparable to Western observations. Hence, the published 
values in the West for energy cost of various activities were converted per unit body weight and used 
in computing the energy cost of different daily activities of Indian Reference Man and Woman in 
arriving at their daily energy requirements3. 
 

 The 1958 RDA for energy for Indians suffered from several shortcomings. Dr. V. N. 
Patwardhan, the author of the 1958 Report on Energy Requirements of Indians3 recognized this and 
stated that “it would be difficult to evaluate correctly the total energy requirement of adults in India, 
for much work had not been done on Indian subjects”. He further stated that attempts to fix total 
energy requirement would therefore suffer from lack of adequate scientific material, particularly, if 
attempt is made to recommend ad-hoc allowances for light, moderate and heavy work. Energy 
allowances for Indians recommended in 1958 suffer from the following limitations, which indicate 
that the 1958 figures for energy requirements of Indians are possibly an overestimate, particularly, in 
the case of heavy activity category -  
 

31 
 



i. The estimate of energy expenditure during non-occupational activity appeared to be rather high 
due to the use of higher values for some of the non-occupational activities; no distinction was 
made in this respect between sedentary category on the one hand and the moderate and heavy 
activity categories on the other. The latter categories would normally spend less energy during 
non-occupational activity period than a sedentary person. 

ii. The energy expenditure for occupational activity involving heavy work appeared to be an 
overestimation. This was because the average energy cost of heavy activity used in the 
computation of energy expenditure i.e.5 kcal/kg/h corresponded to the upper limit of the rate of 
energy expenditure rather than to the practical level of average rate of energy expenditure. From 
the available evidence based on the observed energy expenditure of miners7, it cannot be higher 
than 4.5 kcal/kg/h. It is also reported that the sustained activity involving heavy work can be 
carried out only at 35% VO2 max8. Energy allowances recommended in 1958 for heavy activity 
category are more appropriate for exceptionally heavy activity category like rickshaw pullers, 
underground miners, dock workers etc., rather than for many of the usual types of heavy work 
like earth diggers, manual agricultural labourers, stone cutters etc. Further, the energy requirement 
recommended in 1958 for heavy work was not substantiated by subsequent observation on Indian 
stone cutters9. 

iii. The 1958 computation of daily energy requirement assumed that the level of daily activity was 
the same throughout the year without taking into consideration the holidays in the case of 
individual workers and non-agriculture slack season in case of rural workers. During such periods 
the energy expenditure would more appropriately correspond to sedentary activity. If these 
seasonal variations in intensity of activity are taken into consideration and the daily energy 
expenditure is averaged over the entire year, it will roughly correspond to 75% of the energy spent 
during active working period or season: FAO, 1957 suggested energy requirement in terms of 
average for a year4. 

Considerable additional information and newer approaches for deriving energy requirements 
have emerged after 1980. Revised approaches have been used in 198510 and 200411 by 
FAO/WHO/UNU. Expert Consultants of ICMR Expert Group revised energy requirement for Indians 
in 198912. In 1989, the ICMR Expert Group adopted the procedure of 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU Expert 
Consultations10 that is, using BMR factors for arriving at the energy requirements of Indian Man and 
Woman from the ICMR recommendations in 2010, the reference weight of an Indian reference man 
and woman was changed 60 kg and 55 kg respectively based on weight and height collected across 
16 states. The details of factors used in estimating energy requirement is described in section 4.4 and 
the same was used in the ICMR, 2010 recommendations13. 

 
4.3.  Energy requirements: The current approach   
 

 Currently, it is recommended that energy requirement must be assessed in terms of energy 
expenditure rather than in terms of energy intake. This is because of several reasons.  Energy intakes 
that are derived from dietary recalls are prone to reporting errors as well as many assumptions that 
relate to converting cooked food portions to energy. The energy intake also is known to vary 
substantially from day to day; on some days, it may be above the energy expenditure and sometimes, 
below it. Body energy reserves (fat) help to maintain normal energy expenditure over short periods 
even when the daily intake is below expenditure. Over a period of time, however, adults tend to 
maintain energy balance and constant body weight. 
 
 It has been emphasized that an analysis of energy intake data is also not helpful since it is 
possible to have a grossly inadequate intake by individuals for maintaining normal obligatory energy 
expenditure, lose weight and become substantially underweight. This might happen particularly 

32 
 



among large population groups in underdeveloped and developing countries. On the other hand, 
energy intake above the energy expenditure is harmful leading to overweight and obesity and is 
associated with chronic disorders. This may be found among the populations of affluent countries, or 
affluent sub-populations in developing countries where access to plenty of food is available.  

 

4.4.  Determination of energy requirement 
 

The recommended dietary intake for energy is intended for a healthy, well-nourished and active 
population. The assessment of energy expenditure is a logical approach, where one can specify the 
energy requirements in terms of energy output for productive work and leisure activity of adults and 
tissue deposition in infants, children and during pregnancy and milk secretion during lactation. This 
does imply that there is a need to specify an appropriate body weight of the individual as well as the 
quantum of physical activity that is considered ‘desirable’ for the same individual. Energy intake far 
above the actual requirement is harmful, which may lead to obesity related complications. On the 
other hand, energy intakes far below requirement leads to undernutrition and loss of body weight. 
Hence, in contrast to many other nutrients, like protein and vitamins, no ‘safe allowances’ are 
recommended in the case of the energy requirement, but only the ‘average requirement’ is defined. 

 
There are three important terms while defining energy expenditure using physical activity 

estimations. These are – Physical Activity Ratio (PAR), Physical Activity Level (PAL) and Total 
Energy Expenditure (TEE). The physical activity ratio (PAR) is expressed as the ratio of the energy 
cost of an individual activity per minute to the cost of the basal metabolic rate (BMR) per minute. 

 
Energy cost of an activity per minute 

Physical Activity Ratio (PAR) = 
 Energy cost of basal metabolism per minute 

 

The PAR is unit-less, and the distinct advantage of expressing energy expenditure of an activity 
in terms of PAR values relates to its use for both sexes, at all ages and at all body sizes.  This is 
because these covariates appear in both the numerator and denominator and cancel out.  However, 
this might not true. In studies with subjects of different body weight, it was found that the PAR 
increased for the same activity, when measured in heavier individuals14.  In an Indian study, Kuriyan 
et al found that the PAR increased by about 15% in women with a BMI>25 kg/m2 compared to those 
with a BMI <18 kg/m2, for moderate activities15. Therefore, while in principle, a constant PAR for 
specific activities is used for all ranges of body weight, it is important to consider the possibility that 
in lighter individuals, the PAR may be less.  More data are required in this regard. 

 

At present, given the sporadic nature of data (in terms of covering all activities in different 
genders and age groups) that is specific to a country, PAR values are taken from a detailed table of 
PAR values for different activities available in the FAO/WHO/UNU 2004 report11. However, for 
reasons given above, where available, the PAR values for Indians in different activities are used 
(studies summarized in Table 4.1 and 4.2).  These measurements were made by indirect calorimetry 
for each activity, however, in many studies, the BMR was predicted by the 1985 WHO/FAO/UNU 
equation10.  Measurements of PAR have also been attempted using heart rate monitoring (HRM) (see 
section 4.4.1), however, unless a calibration of the individual subject’s heart rate to a range of activity 
is available, this method should not be used for PAR estimation. This is because the response or slope 
of the heart rate response to a range of activities will vary by individual, depending on a host of factors 
such as age, gender and previous fitness. In addition, the heart rate is also known to ‘drift’ upward 
during activities when they are carried out for intervals over 10 minutes and can considerably alter 
calculated PAR values16. 

 

33 
 



A specific note should be made on the PAR of heavy activities, as they are critical to the 
prediction of the energy requirement in heavy workers. The energy cost of the activity varies and 
based on the intensity of the activity performed. The average PAR of heavy activities is summarized 
in Table 4.3. This is based on the studies which measured energy cost of activity using indirect 
calorimetry. The studies have been summarized in Table 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7. 

 

From the table 4.3, it is clear that there is a wide range for PAR values and these are based on 
the intensity of the activity performed. In order to estimate the energy expenditure, the actual intensity 
of exercise needs to be considered. Also, special consideration should be given to the individual 
working for more than 8 hours a day as performing heavy activity for longer duration with negative 
energy balance is not sustainable. When an individual performs heavy activity (on a treadmill for 
example) for longer duration without rest, the energy metabolism shifts to anaerobic state and reaches 
a point at which the individual has to stop the heavy activity. This can be overcome by providing rest 
periods during the activity. The amount of rest periods depends on the type of activity, and the 
environment (heat, humidity, position of the body etc.,) in which it is undertaken.  However, a simple 
physiological framework can be obtained from exercise studies.  Rodahl et al observed that an 
individual can perform heavy activity without difficulty for 6 h provided they rest for 15 min in every 
hour of exercise33 

 

Table 4.1: PAR values for adult Indian males from different studies11,13,15, 17-19 

 

FAO/WHO Banerjee Bandyopa- Kanade Kuriyan 
ICMR 

Activities / UNU et. al., dhyay et. et. al., et. al., 
(2010)a 

(2004) (1972) al.,  (1980) (2001) (2006) 

Sleeping 1.00 1.00 - - 1.00 1.00 

Lying resting 1.20 - - 1.07 - - 

Sitting 1.20 1.50 1.06 1.16 1.25 1.22 

Standing 1.40 - 1.43 1.23 1.46 1.29 
Personal care (dressing, 

2.40 2.30 - 1.64 - - 
bathing etc.) 
Eating 1.40 1.50 - 1.16 - - 

Household work (general) 2.80b 2.50 - - - - 

Light leisure activity - 1.40 - - - - 
Desk-work (sitting and 

1.40 1.50 1.14 1.36 - 1.32 
writing) 
Sitting and reading   1.06 1.28   

Ironing 3.50 - - - - 1.64 

Sweeping - - - - - 3.67 

Dusting - - - - - 1.56 

Cycling 5.60 - - - - 3.33 

Walking at 3-2 km/hr 2.80c 2.00 3.07 2.62 - 3.06 

Walking at 4-8 km/hr 3.80d 3.20 - - - 3.88 

Running (7-9 km/hr) 6.34 - 6.34 - - - 

a PAR values are same for both males and females 
b Given only for females; c Walking slow; d Walking quickly 
 

.  

34 
 



Table 4.2: PAR values for adult Indian females from different studies11,13,15,20-22 

 

FAO/ Banerjee Sujatha Kuriyan Rao  
ICMR Oberoi 

Activities WHO/ 
(2010)a et. al., 

(1983) et. al., et. al., et. al., 
UNU (2004) (1972) (2000) (2006) (2007) 

Sleeping 1.00 1.00 - - 1.00 1.00 - 
Lying resting 1.20 - - - 1.00 - 0.84 
Sitting 1.20 1.50 1.05 - 1.06 1.21 1.01 
Standing 1.50 - 1.37 - 1.13 1.30 1.15 
Personal care 
(dressing, bathing 3.30 2.30 - - - - - 
etc.) 
Eating 1.60 1.50 - - - - - 
Household work 

2.80 2.50 - - 1.87 2.27 1.74 
(general, cooking) 
Washing utensils 1.70 - - - 2.44 1.70 2.17 
Arranging vessels and 

3.40 - - - 3.01 - - 
folding beds 
Light leisure activity - 1.40 - - - - - 
Desk-work 

1.40 1.50 1.20 - - 1.34 - 
(sitting and writing) 
Sitting and reading 1.50 - 1.08 - - - - 
Ironing 1.70 - - - - 1.58 - 
Sweeping - - - - 3.09 2.41 1.58 
Dusting - - - - - 1.40 - 
Cycling 3.60 - - - - - - 
Walking at 3-2 km/hr 3.00b 2.00 3.23 - 2.67 2.86 2.35 
Walking at 4-8 km/hr - 3.20 - - - 3.58 - 
Running (7-9 km/hr) 6.55 - 7.00 - - - - 
Washing clothes 

2.80 - - 3.00 3.43 - 2.96 
(manual) 
Washing clothes 

- - - 1.92 - - - 
(machine) 

a PAR values are same for both males and females; b Walking slow 
 

As a rough approximation, it means that the 25-30% of the time during the working hours should 
be provided as a resting period in order to perform heavy activity without physiological difficulty 
(exhaustion, increase in plasma lactate etc.,). These rest periods can be integrated into the duration of 
the physical activity, by constructing an integrated work-rest index. Thus, to account for rest periods 
that are taken during exercise, the 
Integrated Energy Index (IEI) is Table 4.3: Average PAR for various heavy activities 
used.  This takes into consideration based on the studies 
the duration of rest during the 
exercise, which, in this case, is taken Male Female 

Activities 
as 30% of the duration of the specific PAR Range PAR Range 
activity.  Using this value for the rest Agriculture activities 5.7 3.1-8.9 4.1 2.4-6.3 
period, the IEI for heavy physical Carrying Loads 5.1 3.0-7.9 - - 
activity works out to be 3.93, 3.84, Pulling carts 6.7 4.2-9.6 - - 
5.01 and 3.51 for agriculture, Mining activities 4.5 2.1-8.4 - - 
carrying loads, pulling carts and 
mining activities respectively. 

35 
 



Table 4.4: Summary of the PAR values for adult Indian performing agriculture activities 
from various studies23-25 

Males Females 
Ramanamurthy Nag et. al.,  Nag et. al.,  

Activities 
& Belavady 1966 1980 1981 
PAR Rangea PAR %CV PAR %CV 

Ploughing 5.8 4.7-8.9 - - - - 
Puddling 6.7 5.7-8.0 - - - - 
Working push-hoe 4.9 3.6-7.0 - - - - 
Trimming bunds 6.7 5.4-7.9 - - - - 
Making channels for irrigation 3.5 3.3-3.7 - - - - 
Harvesting 4.1 3.4-4.8 - - - - 
Making of bundles 3.7 3.1-4.0 - - - - 
Threshing 5.6 4.8-6.4 - - - - 
Transplanting - - 3.1 16.0 - - 
Germinating seeder - - 8.9 17.9 - - 
Bending & holding weights 2 kg - - - - 2.6 17.0 
Spreading grains on floor - - - - 4.4 14.0 
Pounding (helper) - - - - 2.4 34.7 
Winnowing - - - - 2.5 27.4 
Weeding with sickle - - - - 3.4 15.9 
Uprooting (sitting) - - - - 3.5 40.7 
Uprooting (bending) - - - - 4.5 25.5 
Harvesting paddy field - - - - 3.5 33.6 
Transplanting paddy seedling - - - - 3.6 26.4 
Harvesting (bending) - - - - 3.7 33.9 
Carrying load 20-25 kg - - - - 5.3 40.1 
Pounding (single) - - - - 6.3 13.1 
Digging dry soil using spade - - - - 5.7 26.0 

aThe reported range in the study  
 

Table 4.5: Summary of the PAR values for adult Indian males carrying loads from various 
studies26-28 

 

Das and Saha Samanta and Samanta  
Activities 1966 Chaterjee 1981 et. al., 1987 

PAR %CV PAR %CV PAR %CV 
Carrying loads on shoulder (10% gradient) 5.2 13.9 - - - - 
Carrying loads on forehead (10% gradient) 5.7 13.3 - - - - 
Carrying loads on head (10% gradient) 6.9 19.0 - - - - 
Lifting 9 kg load - - 3.0 11.9 - - 
Lifting 13.4 kg load - - 3.6 13.3 - - 
Lifting 16.3 kg load - - 4.8 14.7 - - 
Lifting 20 kg load by porter - - - - 3.4 13.4 
Lifting 30 kg load by porter - - - - 4.5 10.7 
Lifting 40 kg load by porter - - - - 5.6 10.9 
Lifting 50 kg load by porter - - - - 6.4 9.7 
Lifting 60 kg load by porter - - - - 7.9 7.7 

36 
 



Table 4.6: Summary of the PAR values for adult Indian males pulling carts from various 
studies29,30 

 

Datta et. al., 1978 Datta et. al., 1983 
Activities 

PAR %CV PAR %CV 
Rickshaw pulling no load 4.2 16.8 - - 
Rickshaw pulling 1 man 5.5 16.7 - - 
Rickshaw pulling 2 men 6.9 12.4 - - 
Rickshaw pulling 2 men with 50 kg load 8.9 13.5 - - 
Pulling handcart no load - - 4.8 25.0 
Pulling handcart 185 kg load - - 7.0 21.9 
Pulling handcart 370 kg load - - 9.6 17.1 
 

Table 4.7: Summary of the PAR values for adult Indian males performing mining activities 
from various studies31,32 

 

Ramanamurthy and Pal and Sinha  
Activities Dakshayani 1962 1994 

PAR %CV PAR %CV 
Stone cutting 8.4 13.4 - - 
Stone splitting (sitting) 3.1 22.0 - - 
Stone splitting (standing) 4.0 21.9 - - 
Drilling with jackhammer - Tunnel face - - 3.6 22.5 
Drilling with jackhammer - Post and pillar - - 3.2 30.9 
Drilling with jackhammer - horizontal cut and fill - - 4.3 33.8 
Drilling with jackhammer - room and pillar - - 5.0 29.7 
Timbering - preparing face - - 4.1 34.6 
Grouting - - 4.3 33.4 
Loading - Cavo loader - - 3.8 33.0 
Loading - Eimco loader - - 4.1 32.3 
Loading - LHD operator - - 2.1 22.4 
Manual shoveling - - 4.7 32.6 

 
Using this compendium, and a time distribution of activities in a day, PAR values for activities 

performed in a day can be aggregated over a 24-hour period to yield the Physical Activity Level 
(PAL), which is the ratio of the energy expenditure for 24 hours and the BMR over 24 hours.   

Total PAR – hours  
Physical Activity Level (PAL) = 

                        Total time - hours 
 

For example, a person spending 8 hours in sleep (with a PAR of 1), 8 hours in domestic and 
leisure activity (with an average PAR of 2) and 8 hours at work (with an average PAR of 3), would 
have a total PAR -hour value = (8x1) + (8x2) +(8x3) = 48 PAR-hours.  

 

Thus, PAL (for the entire day) = Total PAR-hours / Total time = 48/24 = 2.0 
 

A large proportion of the daily energy expenditure is accounted for by the Basal Metabolic Rate 
(BMR). Therefore, Total Energy Expenditure (TEE) is calculated as a multiplication of BMR to PAL, 
since the PAL and PAR are indexed to the basal metabolic rate: 
 

TEE = PAL X BMR 

37 
 



The BMR is either measured directly, or predicted from body weight, gender and age specific 
equations that were derived from a large international dataset by the FAO/WHO/UNU11. As discussed 
below in section 4.5, there are potential problems with this approach, given the body composition of 
Indians. The above principle of using the PAL values for computing daily energy requirement of men 
and women engaged in light, moderate and heavy activity, has been followed by the FAO/WHO/UNU 
Expert Consultation in 200411.  

 

    It is important to point out that using PAR and PAL values requires accurate reportage of the 
distribution of activities during the day and is subject to reporting error. Biological methods that 
directly measure the TEE, without assumptions of time and PAR (when accurate PAR values may 
not be available for specific activities) are very useful. The previous and this expert consultation have 
also used two other principles (a) Individually calibrated heart rate monitoring (HRM) method, and 
(b) Doubly Labelled Water (DLW) technique. These two techniques, which measure total energy 
expenditure of free-living persons are described briefly in this section. These methods are used to 
measure TEE over a 24-hr period including the metabolic response to food and the energy cost of 
tissue synthesis for adults, which is equivalent to the daily energy requirement. Additional energy for 
deposition in growing tissues is needed to determine energy requirements in infancy, childhood, 
adolescence and during pregnancy and for production and secretion of milk during lactation. It can 
be estimated from calculations of growth (or weight gain) velocity and the composition of weight 
gain or may be estimated by direct measurements of the TEE, which will include these factors.  For 
lactation, a factorial approach can be used, from the average volume and composition of breast milk.   
 

4.4.1. Heart rate monitor (HRM) method 
 

 Several investigations on TEE of healthy well- nourished individuals have been done in a 
broader spectrum of countries using minute-by-minute heart rate monitor (HRM) and individual 
calibration of the relationship between heart rate and oxygen consumption. The latter component is 
critical as explained above, as considerable inter-individual variation can exist. This has become 
possible with an electronic device that can accurately record minute-to-minute heart rate under free-
living conditions, for a whole day or more. The mean TEE measured with this technique is 
comparable to mean value obtained using DLW or whole-body calorimeter. 
 
4.4.2. Doubly labelled water (DLW) method 
 

 The use of the doubly labelled water (DLW) i.e. 2H 18
2 O technique to calculate total production 

of carbon dioxide (CO2) over several days and, from this, measurement of the mean respiratory 
quotient (or food quotient under steady state conditions) and total energy expenditure, was originally 
developed for use in small animals34. Its application was later validated in humans35. Although 
questions have been raised about the appropriateness of the assumptions used in the calculation of 
TEE, the DLW method is considered the most accurate technique for measuring TEE in free-living 
individuals. TEE measured by this method includes the basal metabolism, metabolic response to food, 
thermoregulatory needs, physical activity costs, and energy cost of synthesis of growing tissues. 
Consequently, energy requirements are calculated as the sum of TEE plus the energy deposited as 
protein and fat in growing tissues and organs. This technique has been applied in studies on infants, 
children, adolescents and adults in a number of countries. Availability of this method has enabled the 
measurement of TEE in infants and children directly, which need not be based on energy intake. The 
technique has been used mostly in Europe and USA and also in some South American countries to a 
limited extent and has now been used in India in adults and children (Table 4.8)36-38.  
 

 
 
 

38 
 



Table 4.8: DLW studies performed in India 
 

Mean Mean TEE MeanP
Source Group studied n 

BMI (MJ/d) AL 
Young male active students 

6 22.7 11.2 1.8 
Bangalore 

Borgonha et al, Young slum -dweller men 
6 16.9 7.1 1.5 

200036 Bangalore 
Young rural active men 

6 18.1 12.2 1.9 
Bangalore 
8-9 y boys 

Krishnaveni  30 14.4 6.1 1.4 
Mysore 

et al,  
200937 8-9 y girls 

28 14.9 5.6 1.4 
Mysore 
Young male medical students 

10 20.2 8.8 1.4 
Sinha et al, – normal weight 

201838 Young male medical students 
9 27.5 9.6 1.3 

– overweight  
 

The limitation of this method is the cost and availability of stable isotope labelled water 2H2O18. 
The validation of DLW method against Whole Body Calorimeter (WBC) has been studied widely in 
western population, but only one validated study has been done on free-living Indian adults36. This 
study has been conducted in three groups of subjects, well nourished, upper socio-economic students, 
undernourished slum dwellers and young rural farmers (Table 4.9). The mean difference between the 
two methods was 8% in well-nourished students and 0% in the undernourished slum subjects. 

 

It appears that there is no significant difference in TEE as measured by DLW and the classical, 
currently used factorial method in children. Since there are larger global data sets available on energy 
requirements of infants, children and adolescents, Western data can be used after correcting for the 
lower body weights of Indian infants and children.  
 

Table 4.9: TEE measured by the DLW and WBC method along with BMR and BMI36 

 
Well-nourished Undernourished Rural 

Description 
control subjects slum subjects subjects 

Age (y) 20.2  1.9 21.2  2.1 23.0  2.1 
Weight (kg) 64.7  5.7 44.0  2.9 55.3  2.6 
Height (M) 1.69  0.10 1.61  0.03 1.74  0.0 
BMI (kg/M2) 22.7  1.8 16.9  0.9 18.1  0.6 

Measured BMR (MJ/day) 6.2  0.9 4.9  0.2 6.3  0.3 

TEE by calorimeter 
10.3  1.6 7.3  0.2 - 

(MJ/day) 

TEE by DLW (MJ/day) 11.2  2.6 7.1  0.9 12.2  1.5 

PAL(TEE/BMR) 1.79  0.28 1.54  0.18 1.90  0.19 

  Values are Mean  SD 
  BMR – Basal Metabolic Rate 
  TEE– Total energy expenditure 
  DLW – Doubly labelled water method 
  PAL – Physical activity level 

39 
 



The present ICMR Expert group has made a few revisions to earlier proposed requirements13. 
These revisions are summarized briefly in this section. 
 
Adult requirements  
 

In case of energy requirement for adults, the comparison of BMR derived from 
FAO/WHO/UNU equations11 and BMR observed among Indians suggest that the equation can 
overestimate the BMR by 10-12%40-44. This is perhaps because the FAO/WHO/UNU data set 
included many young and muscular subjects44. The adiposity in Indians is now increasing, and a body 
composition that includes relatively more fat will result in a lower BMR45. The TEE is the product of 
BMR and PAL. 

 
Studies conducted on groups from the Indian urban population reported significantly different 

PAR values for adult male and females (lower for sedentary activities) as compared to a Western 
population15,17-32. This could translate into significant differences in integrated index of PAL. Also, 
several Indian studies reported PAL level for adult male and female sedentary population in the range 
of 1.17-1.2045,46. This value is much lower than the value used to derive energy requirements by 
ICMR, 2010 committee.  

 
Overall, a change in either BMR or PAL could lead to a change in the TEE value44. With lower 

levels of BMR and physical activity observed among the Indian adult population, overestimation of 
BMR and PAL is possible using the earlier recommendations, thus significantly overestimating the 
daily total energy expenditure. The use of the value of energy requirement recommended previously 
for adult men and women is likely to result in a positive energy balance. Therefore, the present 
committee has lowered the energy requirement for adults who are sedentary. In case of moderate or 
heavy activity, there is no recent evidence suggesting the energy expenditure on the activities is lower 
than recommendation made by previous expert group. Therefore, the present committee has retained 
the PAL values for calculating energy requirement. However, the BMR is lowered even for these 
categories. 

 

Infant requirements 
 

The present committee changed the body weight for infants (0-1y) as per the WHO child growth 
standards released in 200639 for deriving energy requirements.  

 

4.5.  Energy requirements of adults 

There are various approaches to estimate energy requirement for adults – factorial, DLW or 
HRM methods. A large number of studies have been conducted using DLW for estimation of energy 
expenditure. The data mostly collected for European and American regions and few studies have been 
done in India36-38. Due to scarcity of data for Indians, the energy requirement for adults has been 
calculated using factorial approach. The aggregated PAL value has been calculated based on the 
energy cost of each activity and multiplied to the predicted BMR values. The factorial approach for 
calculating TEE has also been adopted by FAO/WHO/UNU, 200411. 

 

The daily energy expenditure of adults depends on their occupational activity 
(sedentary/moderate/heavy activity), sleep and non-occupational activity, each typically for eight 
hours in a day. FAO/WHO/UNU have adopted factorial method to estimate the energy requirements 
of adults. The BMR is largely influenced by the body weight which can be used to predict basal 
metabolism of the individuals. To this the aggregated energy spent on the activity expressed as PAL 
is multiplied to arrive at TEE. Therefore, TEE = Predicted BMR x PAL.   

 

40 
 



A set of equations relating to body weight of adults and their BMR was given by the 1985 and 
2004 recommendations of the FAO/WHO/UNU10,11. A study on BMR of Indian subjects by Shetty 
and co-workers41 indicated that BMR of Indians was about 5% lower as compared to the reported 
BMR in developed countries. Based on this observation, a set of equations for computing basal 
metabolism of Indian adults was proposed which was used by ICMR Expert Group in 198912 and in 
201013. Subsequent studies indicated that the equation overestimated the BMR by ~10%. Studies 
from India40-43have shown that the BMR predictive equations given by the FAO/WHO/UNU, 200411 
generally overestimate the BMR of adult Indians by 5 to 12%. Soares and Shetty in 198840 examined 
the validity of Schofield equation for predicting BMR among Indians belonging to different socio-
economic status and reported that the predictive equation overestimated the BMR of Indian males by 
9.3% with higher difference (12.6%) among rural subjects. In the case of females, this difference was 
~9%. On contrary, in another study by Ferro-Luzzi et al44, it has been shown that there is no difference 
between measured and predicted BMR. However, the population on which BMR was measured were 
urban dwellers performing heavy activity and belonged to low socio-economic status. Also, their 
body fat percent ranged from 9.8 to 24.8%. BMR is highly dependent on body composition and 
population with low body fat will have higher BMR compared to high body fat population. 
Considering this evidence, the present committee proposes to lower the BMR by 10% and 9% for 
adult males and females respectively from values obtained through the Schofield equations11.  

 

Equations for predicting BMR proposed by FAO/ WHO/ UNU, 2004 are given in Table 4.10. 
 
 Using the set of equations provided in the Table 4.10, the BMR for adults with defined age, 
gender and body weight is calculated. And the calculated value will be reduced to 10% and 9% for 
males and females respectively. For example, for a 60 kg adult (20 y) male, the BMR equation used 
is (15.1xB.W.(kg)+692.2) and the resultant value is multiplied by 0.90, to obtain the BMR of 1438 
kcal/d. 
 

Table 4.10: Equations for prediction of BMR 
Physical inactivity among Indians has 

(kcal/24h): FAO/WHO/UNU, 200411 
been increasing in the last decade46. In the 
Indian Council of Medical Research-India Prediction equation 

Age 
Diabetes (ICMR-INDIAB) study, Sex proposed by FAO/WHO/UNU 

(years) 
conducted in Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Consultation (2004) 
Jharkhand and Chandigarh, 54.4% were 18-30 15.1xB.W.(kg)+692.2 
found to be inactive with inactivity being 30-60 11.5xB.W.(kg)+873 
higher in the urban areas at 65% (58.7% >60 11.7xB.W.(kg)+587.7 
among men and 71.2% in women)46. The 18-30 14.8xB.W.(kg)+486.6 
reported PAL values for sedentary 30-60 8.1xB.W.(kg)+845.6 
population ranged between 1.17-1.2045,47. 
The studies clearly show that there is a shift >60 9.1xB.W.(kg)+658.5 

in physical activity from active to inactive. 
BMR of Indians is 10% and 9% lower for males and 

The population with heavy activity is not females respectively than the international values 
performing intense activity continuously for (FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004). 
8 hrs. It should be mentioned however, that B.W. = Body weight 

proportion of population engaging in heavy 
work is quite small. Occupational activity 
pattern of Indian rural population as per the NNMB survey done in 1996-9748 indicates that a majority 
of rural adults were engaged either in sedentary or moderate activity and a very small population were 
engaged in heavy activities. 

 

41 
 

Females Males 



In the earlier report, the PAR values (energy cost of each activity) were taken from 
FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004. However, values of energy cost of a population need to be specific to the 
population being studied. The PAR values used by FAO/WHO/UNU were obtained from the studies 
conducted in Western populations. Studies carried out in India15,17-22 indicate that values differ (lower 
for sedentary activity) for both in Indian adult males as well as in females (Table 4.1 and 4.2). This 
could be because PAR is not constant across the range of body weight and extrapolation from a heavy 
weight individual can overestimate PAR for lower weight individual14. These could translate into 
significant differences in an integrated index of activity such as PAL.  

 
Therefore, a recalculation was performed using the PAR values reported for Indian population 

performing sedentary activity (Table 4.12) and this showed that the PAL was lower from 1.53 that 
was used in the previous recommendation13 to 1.40. This has led to the present recommendation that 
PAL values should be lower for sedentary activity groups (Table 4.11). Given the limited data 
available, this is also a prudent value as it is the lower limit of the range suggested by 
FAO/WHO/UNU11 for sedentary activity. Equally, it should be emphatically stated that it is important 
to increase physical activity daily to maintain healthy lifestyle. The physical activity should not 
always be aimed to reduce body weight as it is also necessary to maintain a healthy heart and cognitive 
function.    

 

 For moderate and heavy activities, there is no evidence suggesting that the PAL in Indians is 
lower than the recommendations made by previous committee. Therefore, the present expert group 
has retained the PAL values for the moderate and heavy activities. However, the energy requirement 
of a group should be modified based on the activity performed in a day to maintain energy balance. 
In case of heavy activity workers, there can be variation in physical activity based on duration and 
intensity of work performed, which can change their energy expenditure.  

 

A comparison of PAL values for different categories of work for Indian reference adult man 
and woman as per the previous and current recommendations are given in Table 4.11 along with 
values recommended by FAO/WHO/UNU Consultation of 2004. 
 

Table 4.11: PAL Values proposed by ICMR Expert Group of 2020, 2010,  
1989 compared to the figures proposed by FAO/WHO/UNU Consultation, 2004 

 

ICMR ICMR ICMR  FAO/WHO/UNU 
Level of activity 

198912 201013 2020 200411 

Sedentary Work 1.60 1.53 1.40 1.40-1.69 

Moderate Work 1.90 1.80 1.80 1.70 – 1.99 

Heavy Work 2.50 2.30 2.30 2.00 – 2.40* 

   *PAL Value > 2.40 is difficult to maintain over a prolonged period. 
 

A computation of energy expenditure for an adult Indian population using factorial computation 
is given in Table 4.12. As discussed above, body weights of normal healthy Indian adult individual 
man and woman are taken as 60 kg and 55 kg respectively. This can be considered as the standard 
body weight for Indian adult. The PAL values can be calculated as the aggregated PAR over 24 hrs. 
Then the PAL value is multiplied with calculated BMR to derive at energy expenditure for a day. 

 

Energy expenditure at the three levels of activity at different age groups and at different body 
weights are given in Table 4.13. Special consideration should be given for the population >60 y as 

42 
 



BMR in the population decreases by nearly 200 kcal, assuming the same reference body weight of 60 
kg and 55 kg in both men and women respectively is maintained. 

 
4.6. Energy requirement during pregnancy 
 
4.6.1. Determinants of energy cost during pregnancy 
 

The FAO/WHO/UNU 2004 Consultation on energy requirements11, reviewed the data available 
on maternal weight gain and foetal body weight and decided to use the gestational weight gain of 10 
to 14 kg, with an average of 12 kg, and full-term birth weight of 3.1 to 3.6 kg with a desirable birth 
weight of 3.3 kg. Data from developed countries indicate that the optimal pregnancy outcome in terms 
of birth weight, infant growth and survival is seen when pregnancy weight gain is about 12-14 kg. 

 

Energy requirement during pregnancy comprises the normal requirement for an adult woman 
and an additional requirement needed for gestational weight gain associated with protein and fat 
accretion in maternal, foetal and placental tissues and increase in BMR. Most of the accretion occurs 
during the second and the third trimesters. Protein is predominantly deposited in fetus (42%) but also 
in uterus (17%), blood (14%) placenta (10%) and breast (8%)11. Fat is predominantly deposited in 
fetus and maternal tissues and contributes substantially to overall energy cost of pregnancy.  

 

Protein and fat gain associated with gestational weight gain of 12 kg, would be 597g and 3.7 kg 
respectively. Besides weight gain and its associated costs, the BMR also increases during pregnancy. 
Cumulative increase in BMR during pregnancy is significantly correlated with gestational weight 
gain. For a 12 kg weight gain, basal metabolism would increase by about 35,000 kcal. The increase 
in BMR relative to pre-pregnancy values can be considered to be 5.3, 11.4 and 25.3% during the first, 
second and the third trimesters, respectively11. 

  

Energy requirement during pregnancy also depends upon any deviation from normal physical 
activity. Several studies in different regions have shown that there is no evidence of any reduced 
activities during pregnancy, although global literature suggests that women do less arduous tasks 
towards the end of pregnancy. Some studies in India have also shown that there is a shift towards 
more sedentary activity even among families whose usual occupation involves manual labour49. 

 

 Longitudinal measurements of DLW in free living well-nourished women in Sweden, UK and 
USA have shown a mean increase of 16.5% in TEE by the third trimester value compared to non-
pregnant values. This is mostly due to body weight gain, since no difference between pregnant and 
non-pregnant values was found in TEE, when expressed as per kg body weight. Therefore, for an 
average 12 kg weight gain, the increment in TEE would be 20, 85 and 310 kcal/day during the first, 
second and third trimesters respectively11. 

 
4.6.2. Additional energy requirement during pregnancy  
  

The additional energy required during pregnancy (Table 4.14) can be estimated by the factorial 
method in two ways: using either the cumulative increment in the BMR or in the TEE during 
pregnancy, plus energy deposited as protein and fat. Most of the additional energy is required in 
second and third trimester. This increase depends upon the pre-pregnancy body weight and pre-
pregnancy BMR. The increment in BMR is due to tissue deposited during pregnancy as protein and 
fat in the fetus and the mother and depends upon the total Gestational Weight Gain (GWG) during 
the 9 months of pregnancy which may range from 10 to 14 kg with an average of 12 kg. In the Indian 
reference women with pre-pregnancy weight of 55 kg, the body weight gain may be 10 kg. Data from 
NNMB surveys indicate that the mean height of Indian women is about 151 cm and the mean body 
weight is 47 kg; the average pregnancy weight gain in this population is only 7-8 kg. 

43 
 



Table 4.12: Computation of energy expenditure of adult 
Indian population using factorial approach 

 

Major lifestyles, energy expenditure  
(PAR values)a 

Duration 
Main daily activities 

(h) 
Moderate Heavy or 

Sedentary 
active vigorously active 

Sleep 8 1.0 1.0 1.0 

Occupational activity 8 1.3b 2.5c 4.1d 

Non-occupational activity 8 1.9 1.9 1.9 

Mean  1.41 1.80 2.33 

Non-occupational activity details 

Personal care 1 1.6 1.6 1.6 

Eating 1 1.2 1.2 1.2 

Commuting to work by bus     
or by vehicle or by walk 1 2.0 2.0 2.0 

General household or other 
2 2.0 2.0 2.0 

activities 

Walking at various speeds 
1 3.4 3.4 3.4 

without load 

Light leisure activity 2 1.4 1.4 1.4 

Mean non-occupational 
8 1.9 1.9 1.9 

activity 

Men: body wt. (65kg), BMR 
-- 2123 2711 3509 

(1506 kcal) 

Women: body wt. (55kg), 
-- 1670 2131 2759 

BMR (1184 kcal) 
 

aPAR values from Table 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 & 4.7 
bPAR is calculated for sedentary activities like desk work, sitting and reading and some time for standing; 
c PAR is calculated for moderate activity like standing, walking at various speed, cycling and carrying light 
weights;  
dPAR is calculated as IEI assuming 30% of rest period in the activity. Here average of IEI for heavy activities 
is included - agricultural activities (3.93), carrying loads (3.84), pulling cart (5.05) and mining (3.51) activities 
(see section 4.4). This should be changed depending upon the activity performed. 

 
  

44 
 



Table 4.13: Current estimated energy Requirement of Indian Men and Women at Different Ages and Body Weights 
 

19-30 y 30-60 y >60 y 
Body 

 Sedentary Moderate Heavy Sedentary Moderate Heavy Sedentary Moderate Heavy 
Sex BMR BMR BMR 

weight Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work 
(kcal (kcal (kcal 

 (kg) /d)a TEE TEE TEE 
(kcal/d)b /d)a TEE TEE TEE 

/d)a TEE TEE TEE 
 

(kcal/d)b (kcal/d)b (kcal/d)b (kcal/d)b (kcal/d)b  
 (kcal/d)b (kcal/d)b (kcal/d)b 

45 1235 1728 2222 2839 1251 1752 2253 2878 1003 1404 1805 2306 

50 1302 1823 2344 2996 1303 1824 2346 2997 1055 1478 1900 2427 

55 1370 1919 2467 3152 1355 1897 2439 3116 1108 1551 1995 2549 

60 1438 2014 2589 3308 1407 1969 2532 3235 1161 1625 2089 2670 

65 1506 2109 2711 3465 1458 2042 2625 3354 1213 1699 2184 2791 

70 1574 2204 2834 3621 1510 2114 2718 3473 1266 1772 2279 2912 

75 1642 2299 2956 3777 1562 2187 2812 3592 1319 1846 2374 3033 

40 982 1374 1767 2258 1064 1490 1916 2448 930 1303 1675 2140 

45 1049 1468 1888 2412 1101 1542 1982 2533 972 1361 1749 2235 

50 1116 1563 2009 2567 1138 1593 2048 2618 1013 1419 1824 2331 

55 1184 1657 2130 2722 1175 1645 2115 2702 1055 1477 1898 2426 

60 1251 1751 2252 2877 1212 1696 2181 2787 1096 1535 1973 2521 

65 1318 1846 2373 3032 1249 1748 2247 2872 1138 1593 2048 2616 

70 1386 1940 2494 3187 1285 1800 2314 2957 1179 1650 2122 2711 
 

aBMR calculated using FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004 equation and adjusted to 10% and 9% lower value for males and females, respectively 
bPAL Values: Sedentary – 1.40, Moderate – 1.80; Heavy 2.30 

45 
 

Females Males 



Table 4.14: Current additional energy cost of pregnancy with  
12 kg and 10 kg GWG* 

 

1st trimester 2nd trimester 3rd trimester Total 
 

(g/d) (g/d) (g/d) Deposited (g) 

A. Rate of tissue deposition 

Weight gain (g/d) 17 60 54 12000 
Protein deposition (g/d) 0 1.3 5.1 597 

Fat deposition (g/d) 5.2 18.9 16.9 3741 

B. Energy cost of pregnancy (kcal) from energy deposited and increase in BMR 

Protein deposited 0 7.2 29.0 3370 
(kcal/d)a (0) (6.0) (24) (2808) 

48.3 175 156 34600  
Fat deposited (kcal/d)a 

(40.2) (145) (130) (28832) 

Efficiency of energy 4.8 18.2 18.4 3800 
utilization (kcal/d)b (4.0) (15.0) (15.3) (3167) 

Basal metabolic rate 48 95 237 35130  
increase (kcal/d) (40) (79) (198) (29274) 

Total energy cost of 101 295 440 77100  
pregnancy (kcal/d) (84) (246) (367) (64247) 

C. Energy cost of pregnancy (kcal) from energy deposited and increase in TEE 

Protein deposited  0 7.2 29.0 3370 
kcal/d) (0) (6.0) (24) (2808) 

Fat deposited  48.3 175 156 34600  
(kcal/d) (40.2) (145) (130) (28832) 

TEE increasec 20 84 311 38560 
(kcal/d) (17) (70) (259)  (32132) 

Total energy cost of 69 266 496 76530 
pregnancy (kcal/d) (57) (222) (413)  (63775) 

Average energy cost of 
85 280 470 77000  

pregnancy based on B 
(70) (230) (390) (64170) 

and Cd(kcal/d) 

Average of 2nd and 3rd 375 
-- -- 

trimesters (kcal/d) (310) 
 

*Figures within parentheses correspond to energy costs for 10 kg GWG. 

aProtein and fat deposition with an energy value of 5.65 kcal/g protein deposited and 9.25 kcal/g fat deposited 
bEfficiency of food energy utilization for protein and fat deposition is taken as 0.90 

cIncludes costs of efficiency of energy utilization 
dRounded off to nearest 5 kcal 
 

 

46 
 



Additional energy requirement of Indian women during pregnancy have been computed on the 
basis of the reference Indian women and pregnancy weight gain of 12 kg and 10 kg. The previous 
committee suggested the average energy requirement of 375 kcal and 310 kcal for 12 kg and 10 kg 
GWG respectively with an average additional energy requirement of 350 kcal for second and third 
trimester (Table 4.14). With no recent data on pregnant Indian women being available, the present 
committee retains the energy requirement proposed by the ICMR, 201013. 

 

Based on the Table 4.14, the following recommendation (Table 4.15) has been made for the 
additional energy requirements of an Indian woman with pre-pregnancy weight of 55 kg. It should be 
noted that it is the average value for the 2nd and 3rd trimesters is taken for a single recommendation 
value. 

Hence, an average recommendation of 350 Table 4.15: Additional energy 
kcal/day through the second and third trimesters, as requirement for pregnant women 
additional requirement during pregnancy for an Indian (kcal/d) 
woman of 55 kg body weight and pregnancy weight  

gain between 10 -12 kg can continue as per the 10 kg 12 kg 

previous recommendation. Trimester GWG GWG 
 Kcal/d 
Appropriate adjustments can also be made to 

1st trimester 70 85 
compute the requirements of average women with 
pre-pregnant weight of 47 kg, gestational weight gain 2nd trimester 230 280 

3rd
(GWG) of 7-8 kg, and birth weight of 2.8 kg  trimester 390 470 
especially in programmes for food supplementation Average of 2nd and 
intended to bridge the gap between the requirement 3rd 310 375 

 trimester 
and intake in pregnant women.    
 

4.7.  Energy requirement during lactation 
 

4.7.1. Determinant of energy cost during lactation 
 

Energy cost of lactation is determined by the breast milk output and its energy content. Milk 
output is determined by test feeding and weighing, and a correction of 5% is made in arriving at the 
milk output for the insensible water loss of the baby. The energy content of milk is based on the 
energy value of protein, fat and lactose of the milk, which are arrived at by analysis and energy 
estimate by bomb calorimetry. Energy content is 5.65 kcal per g of protein and free amino acids 9.25 
kcal per g of fat and 3.96 kcal per g of lactose. The metabolizable energy in human milk is assumed 
to be 5.3% lower than its gross energy content based on proximate analysis. A study on energy 
expenditure of Indian lactating woman indicates a negative energy balance, which could be corrected 
by the fat deposited during pregnancy.  

 

4.7.2. Energy requirement for lactation 
 

There is no evidence for additional demand for lactation besides the energy content of milk 
secreted for breast feeding. There is no change in TEE during lactation period over that in the non-
pregnant period. Frequent sitting for breast feeding itself could be an adaptation for energy 
conservation. Milk output data collected from developing countries was used by previous committee 
to compute energy cost of lactation of Indian women (Table 4.16). The present committee retains the 
energy requirement proposed by ICMR 201013. The energy cost of milk output is corrected for 
efficiency of utilization of milk energy i.e. 80%. 

 

Daily additional energy requirement of a woman who exclusively breast feed during the first 6 
months would be 600 kcal and for partial breast feeding during 7-12 months, it would be 517 kcal or 
approximately 520 kcal. A study of energy requirement of lactating women based on milk output and 

47 
 



energy output computed from actual measurement showed that average energy utilization for average 
milk production of 624 ml was 549 kcal. This would work out to 594 kcal for 722 ml of milk output 
and correlating closely with the figures given in Table 4.17.  

 

4.7.3. Fat accretion during pregnancy as a source of energy during lactation 
 

 When food scarcity and undernutrition were common in earlier decades in India, lactating 
women mobilised body fat to provide energy needs for breast milk secretion during the first six 
months of lactation51. To prevent aggravation of undernutrition, pregnant and lactating women at risk 
of undernutrition and those with low pregnancy weight gain would require additional 300 and 
500 kcal to meet the energy needs of pregnancy and lactation.  

Table 4.16: Energy expenditure during lactation in Indian women50 

 

Mean Energy cost of 
Correcte Gross Energy Daily gross 

Month milk milk 
d outputa contentb energy secreted 

postpartum outputa productionc 
(g/d) (kcal/d) (kcal/d) 

(g/d) (kcal/d) 
1 562 590 395 494 468 
2 634 666 446 558 520 
3 582 611 409 511 484 
4 768 806 540 675 639 
5 778 817 547 684 648 
6 804 844 566 708 671 

Mean 688 722 483 605 573 
Partial breastfeeding 

7 688 722 484 605 598 
8 635 667 452 565 558 
9 516 542 367 479 453 
10 -- -- -- -- -- 
11 565 593 402 563 497 
12 511 537 364 455 449 

Mean 583 612 414 517 511 
aInsensible water losses assumed to be equal to 5% of milk intake. 
b 2.8 KJ/g or 0.67 kcal/g of milk output measured by macronutrient analysis 
c Based on energy efficiency of 80% 

 

 

In the current dual nutrition burden era, there has been reduction in undernutrition rates and 
increase in overnutrition rates; even in women in their twenties, from low middle income families, a 
third of women are overweight52,53. A recent study from New Delhi on low middle income lactating 
women showed that over nutrition is emerging as a major problem both in lactating and non-lactating 
women, particularly in women over 30 years of age54. 

Currently the average weight gain during pregnancy is 10-12 kg; of this the fat gain accounts 
for 2-4 kg. It is important to consider whether utilisation of fat accreted during pregnancy should be 
taken into account while computing energy requirements during lactation in normally nourished and 
over-nourished women. The fat store accumulated during pregnancy could yield 18000 to 36000 kcal 
and provide a maximum of 100 to 200 kcal for milk secretion during the first six months. If this is 
taken into account, the extra energy allowance during lactation could be reduced by 100 to 200 
kcal/day in well-nourished women with an adequate gestational weight gain. This would prevent an 
increase in overweight in lactating women in India54. However, the reduction in the energy 

48 
 



allowance should only be considered if the quality and diversity of the food intake is high enough to 
meet the requirements of other nutrients.   
 

Table 4.17: Milk production and energy utilization by Indian lactating women on                    
whom total energy balance was conducted50 

Subject Energy Total energy Milk output Energy utilization for 
No. intake expenditure (ml) milk production 

 Values give in kcal/24h (mean of 6 months) 
1 2255 2555 579.8 481.2 
2 2046 2577 861.5 315.1 
3 2330 2179 477.3 396.2 
4 2313 2156 700.5 581.4 
5 2680 2213 860.4 714.1 
6 2037 2189 520.8 432.3 
7a 1704 1825 -- b -- 
8 1802 2137 -- b -- 

Mean 2148 2229 666.7 553.4 
aSubject unwell at times 
bValues were available for infants aged up to 2 months, hence not considered 

 

4.8.   Energy requirements of infants and children 
 

4.8.1. Energy requirements of infants 
 

The FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004 derived energy requirement for infants on the basis of the DLW 
method. A total of 13 studies on healthy, well-nourished and non-stunted infants aged from 0-12 
months were included. The data were collected on infants from different countries – UK, USA, 
Netherlands, Chile and China. There have been no data on infants from India11. 

 

The previous recommendations by the expert group adopted the FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004 
recommendations on energy requirement and with no new evidence available the same 
recommendations will be continued, with modifications in body weights for infants. The 2004 
Consultations of FAO/WHO/UNU derived the energy requirement of infants on the basis of DLW 
method and to this, the energy acquisition due to growth was added to arrive at the total daily energy 
requirement. However, the present Consultation group has used the body weights of infants 0-12 
months of age from WHO child growth standards, 2006 unlike the previous one where body weights 
were from western data39.  

 

Since there is no data on energy requirement among Indian infants using DLW method or HRM 
method, the same equation as provided by FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004 was used for Indian infants. The 
equation to derive energy requirement of infants as reported by FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004 is as 
follows11: 

TEE (MJ/d)  = -0.416 + 0.371*BW (kg) 
 

n=320, r=0.85 and 
Standard error of estimate  =  0.456 MJ/d  

 

TEE (kcal/d) = -99.4 + 88.6*BW (kg) 
 

Standard error of estimate =  109 kcal/d 
 

49 
 



 Energy deposition Table 4.18: Protein, fat and energy deposition during growth 
during growth [weight gain in the first year of life11 
(g/d) x energy deposited/g] 
has to be added to TEE to Protein Fat mass Weight Energy accrued in 
obtain energy requirement. Age 

gain gain gain normal growth* 
Therefore, the total energy (months) 

(g/d) (g/d) (g/d) (KJ/g) (kcal/g) 
requirement during infancy 

Boys 
(kcal/d)=[-99.4 + 88.6*BW 

0-3 2.6 19.6 32.7 25.1 6.0 
(kg)] + [wt gain (g/d) x 

3-6 2.3 3.9 17.7 11.6 2.8 
energy deposited (kcal/g)]. 

6-9 2.3 0.5 11.8 6.2 1.5 
 

 The body weights of 9-12 1.6 1.7 9.1 11.4 2.7 

infants at different ages and Girls 

energy requirement levels, 0-3 2.2 19.7 31.1 26.2 6.3 
which can be adopted for 3-6 1.9 5.8 17.3 15.6 3.7 
Indian infants, are derived 6-9 2.0 0.8 10.6 7.4 1.8 
from Tables 4.18 and 4.19. 9-12 1.8 1.1 8.7 9.8 2.3 
The body weight of infants *Energy equivalents of 1 g protein = 23.6 KJ (5.65 kcal);            
used to derive the energy 1 g fat = 38.7 KJ(9.25 kcal) 
deposition during growth are  
from WHO child growth standards38. Using the new child growth standards, the energy requirement 
for infants are 98 kcal/kg/d (1% increase over the previous recommendation) and 80 kcal/kg/d for 0-
6 months and 6-12 months respectively. The comparison of energy requirement between the present 
and previous recommendations is presented in Table 4.23. 

 

4.8.2. Energy requirement of children 
 

The energy requirement for children is arrived at, through the estimation of TEE by doubly 
labelled water or heart rate monitoring, and the energy needed for growth is added to this estimate. 

 

Although this is a more direct approach to determine the energy requirement of this age group, 
there is hardly any data on energy expenditure of Indian children using this method. It must be 
realized that Indian children of this age group particularly in rural areas are more active than children 
in the Western countries. These Western children are mostly urbanites, less active and hence more 
prone to obesity. Data from developed countries may therefore not be fully applicable to children 
from the developing countries, although the computed growth requirement may be applicable to both 
categories of children. However, rural children from developing countries like India weigh less than 
the reference children. 

 

FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004 reports11 the energy requirement of children and adolescents based on 
the estimation of DLW and HRM on children from industrialized (75%) and developing countries 
and the following quadratic polynomial was derived from body weight of boys and girls: 

 

Boys:  
TEE kcal/day:  310.2 + 63.3*BW(kg) – 0.263*BW(kg2) 
TEE MJ/day: 1.298 +0.265*BW (kg) – 0.0011*BW(kg2) 

 n: 801, r=0.982, r2 = 0.964 
 
Girls:   

TEE kcal/day: 263.4 + 65.3*BW(kg)– 0.454*BW(kg2) 
            TEE MJ/day: 1.102 +0.273*BW(kg)– 0.0019*BW(kg2) 

 n: 808, r = 0.955, r2 = 0.913  

50 
 



Table 4.19: Current energy requirement of infants during first year of life* 

Total Energy Energy 
deposition c Daily energy requirement d 

Weight Expenditure b 
Age  Weight 

Sex 
(months) (kg)a gain 

 
(g/d) kcal/ MJ/ kca kcal/ MJ/ kcal/ KJ/k

MJ/d
d d l/d  

d d kg/d f g/d f 

0 - 1 3.90 40.0 246 1.030 240 1.005 490 2.035 125 520 

1 – 2 5.05 38.3 348 1.457 230 0.963 580 2.420 115 480 

2 – 3 6.00 31.7 432 1.809 190 0.795 620 2.604 105 430 

3 – 4 6.70 23.3 494 2.069 65 0.273 560 2.342 85 350 

4 – 5 7.25 18.3 543 2.273 51 0.215 590 2.488 80 340 

5 – 6 7.70 15.0 583 2.440 42 0.176 620 2.615 80 340 
Boys 

6 – 7 8.10 13.3 618 2.588 20 0.084 640 2.672 80 330 

7 – 8 8.45 11.7 649 2.718 18 0.073 670 2.791 80 330 

8 – 9 8.75 10.0 676 2.829 15 0.063 690 2.892 80 330 

9 – 10 9.05 10.0 702 2.940 27 0.113 730 3.053 80 340 

10 – 11 9.30 8.3 725 3.033 23 0.094 750 3.127 80 340 

11 – 12 9.50 6.7 742 3.107 18 0.075 760 3.183 80 330 

0 - 1 3.70 33.3 228 0.956 210 0.879 440 1.835 120 500 

1 – 2 4.65 31.7 313 1.308 200 0.835 510 2.144 110 460 

2 – 3 5.45 26.7 383 1.605 168 0.703 550 2.308 100 420 

3 – 4 6.10 21.7 441 1.846 80 0.336 520 2.182 85 360 

4 – 5 6.65 18.3 490 2.050 68 0.284 560 2.334 85 350 

5 – 6 7.10 15.0 530 2.217 55 0.232 590 2.449 80 340 
Girls 

6 – 7 7.45 11.7 561 2.347 21 0.088 580 2.435 80 330 

7 – 8 7.75 10.0 587 2.458 18 0.075 610 2.534 80 330 

8 – 9 8.05 10.0 614 2.569 18 0.075 630 2.645 80 330 

9 – 10 8.35 10.0 640 2.681 23 0.096 670 2.777 80 330 

10 – 11 8.60 8.3 663 2.773 19 0.080 680 2.854 80 330 

11 – 12 8.80 6.7 680 2.848 15 0.064 700 2.912 80 330 

 

*Daily energy requirement (kcal/d) is calculated from linear regression analysis of total energy expenditure on weight, 
plus allowance for energy deposition in tissues during growth 
aBody weights for infants from WHO child growth standards, 200639 
bTEE (kcal/d) = -99.4 + 88.6kg; TEE (MJ/d) = -0.416 + 0.371kg11 
cWeight gain x energy accrued in normal growth (Table 4.18) 
dRequirement = total energy expenditure + energy deposition 
eRounded off to the nearest 10 kcal;  
fRounded off to the nearest 5 kcal and 10 KJ 
 

51 
 



Table 4.20: Year-wise body weight, average weight gain and energy cost of weight gain  
 

Boys Girls 

Age Energy cost of Energy cost of 
y Body Wt Weight Body Wt. Weight 

wt gain wt gain  
kg* gain kg/y kg* gain kg/y 

kcal/day cal/day 

1 9.9 1.7 9.32 8.9 1.6 8.77 

2 12.2 2.3 12.60 11.5 2.6 14.25 

3 14.3 2.1 11.51 13.9 2.4 13.15 

4 16.3 2.0 10.96 16.1 2.2 12.05 

5 18.5 2.2 12.05 18.3 2.2 12.05 

6 20.5 2.0 10.96 20.2 1.9 10.41 

7 22.9 2.4 13.15 22.4 2.2 12.05 

8 25.4 2.5 13.70 25.0 2.6 14.25 

9 28.1 2.7 14.79 28.2 3.2 17.53 

10 31.2 3.1 16.99 31.9 3.7 20.27 

11 34.6 3.4 18.68 36.2 4.3 23.34 

12 38.9 4.3 23.51 41.2 5.0 27.34 

13 44.3 5.4 29.53 46.0 4.8 26.52 

14 50.6 6.3 34.63 50.1 4.1 22.25 

15 56.6 5.9 32.55 52.8 2.8 15.18 

16 61.3 4.7 25.92 54.7 1.8 10.08 

17 64.8 3.5 19.12 55.7 1.1 5.86 

18 67.3 2.5 13.81 56.7 0.9 5.10 

 

*WHO-MGRS body weights were used for children 12-59 months and WHO reference values (2007) were 
used for children and adolescents (5-18y). Refer chapter 3 for details. 
Energy cost of weight gain: 2 kcal/g weight gain11 

 
  

52 
 



Table 4.21a: Energy requirement and PAL of Indian children and adolescents (boys) 

Boys 

Energy 
Age Total energy Total energy 
(y) Weighta TEEb cost of 

PALc requiremente requirementf 
(kg) (kcal/d) growthd 

kcal/d kcal/d MJ/d kcal/kg/d KJ/kg/d 

1-2 9.9 847.3g 1.63 9.32 857 3.585 85 356 

2-3 12.2 1043.3 1.50 12.60 1056 4.418 87 362 

3-4 14.3 1161.6 1.40 11.51 1173 4.908 82 343 

4-5 16.3 1272.1 1.45 10.96 1283 5.368 79 329 

5-6 18.5 1391.2 1.51 12.05 1403 5.871 76 317 

6-7 20.5 1497.3 1.54 10.96 1508 6.311 74 308 

7-8 22.9 1621.9 1.58 13.15 1635 6.841 71 299 

8-9 25.4 1748.3 1.62 13.70 1762 7.372 69 290 

9-10 28.1 1881.3 1.65 14.79 1896 7.933 67 282 

10-11 31.2 2029.1 1.68 16.99 2046 8.561 66 274 

11-12 34.6 2186.0 1.72 18.68 2205 9.224 64 267 

12-13 38.9 2374.6 1.76 23.51 2398 10.034 62 258 

13-14 44.3 2597.9 1.80 29.53 2627 10.993 59 248 

14-15 50.6 2840.2 1.83 34.63 2875 12.028 57 238 

15-16 56.6 3048.8 1.84 32.55 3081 12.892 54 228 

16-17 61.3 3201.6 1.84 25.92 3228 13.504 53 220 

17-18 64.8 3306.8 1.83 19.12 3326 13.916 51 215 

18-19 67.3 3378.8 1.83 13.81 3393 14.195 50 211 

Note:  This Table reflects the energy requirement of boys who are healthy and have a moderate activity level.  
a Weight from Table 4.20 
b Energy (TEE) was predicted from above cited gender specific quadratic equation. This reflects the TEE of 

moderately active children. 
c PAL was calculated as TEE/BMR. BMR was estimated from age and gender appropriate prediction 

equations11 
d From Table 4.20 
e Requirement = Sum of TEE and energy cost of growth. Rounded off to the nearest 10 kcal. 
f Rounded off to the nearest 5 kcal. 
g TEE of infants (aged 1-2 years) was reduced by 7% to fit with energy requirement of infants11  

53 
 



Table 4.21b: Energy requirement and PAL of Indian children and adolescents (girls) 
 

Girls 

Energy 
Age Total energy Total energy 
(y) Weighta TEEb cost of 

PALc require nte requirementf 
(kg) (kcal/d) growthd me

kcal/d kcal/d MJ/d kcal/kg/d KJ/kg/d 

1-2 8.9 751.9g 1.66 8.77 761 3.184 85 356 

2-3 11.5 954.3 1.49 14.25 969 4.052 84 352 

3-4 13.9 1083.4 1.41 13.15 1097 4.588 79 330 

4-5 16.1 1197.0 1.47 12.05 1209 5.059 75 314 

5-6 18.3 1306.3 1.52 12.05 1318 5.516 72 301 

6-7 20.2 1397.2 1.56 10.41 1408 5.889 70 292 

7-8 22.4 1498.3 1.59 12.05 1510 6.319 67 282 

8-9 25.0 1612.2 1.62 14.25 1626 6.805 65 272 

9-10 28.2 1743.8 1.65 17.53 1761 7.370 62 261 

10-11 31.9 1884.5 1.68 20.27 1905 7.969 60 250 

11-12 36.2 2031.0 1.73 23.34 2054 8.595 57 238 

12-13 41.2 2181.7 1.75 27.34 2209 9.243 54 225 

13-14 46.0 2306.3 1.76 26.52 2333 9.761 51 212 

14-15 50.1 2394.4 1.76 22.25 2417 10.111 48 202 

15-16 52.8 2445.9 1.75 15.18 2461 10.297 47 195 

16-17 54.7 2476.3 1.74 10.08 2486 10.403 45 190 

17-18 55.7 2492.5 1.73 5.86 2498 10.453 45 188 

18-19 56.7 2505.8 1.73 5.10 2511 10.506 44 185 

 
Note: This Table reflects the energy requirement of girls who are healthy and have a moderate activity level. 
a Weight from Table 4.20 
b Energy (TEE) was predicted from above cited gender specific quadratic equation. This reflects the TEE of 

moderately active children. 
c PAL was calculated as TEE/BMR.  BMR was estimated from age and gender appropriate prediction 

equations11 
d From Table 4.20 
e Requirement = Sum of TEE and energy cost of growth. Rounded off to the nearest 10 kcal. 
f Rounded off to the nearest 5 kcal. 
g TEE of infants (aged 1-2 years) was reduced by 7% to fit with energy requirement of infants11 
 

54 
 



Table 4.21c: Daily activity pattern required in a moderately active lifestyle of a12-15 year 
child with a PAL of 1.8 compared with a child having a PAL of 1.5* 

 PAL = 1.5 PAL = 1.8 
Duration Duration 

Activity PAR PAR x h PAR x h 
(h) (h) 

Sleep 1.0 9 9 9 9 
School-related activities 
Walk to School 3.0 0 0 1 3 
In class 1.5 6 9 6 9 
Recess play time 3.0 1 3 1 3 

Home-related activities   
Homework 1.5 2 3 2 3 
TV/Sedentary activity 1.5 4 6 2 3 
Discretionary Play 
Intermittent fun-play 3.0 2 6 2 6 
Focused Games (football, 

8.0 0 0 1 8 
basketball) 
Total  24 36 24 44 
PAL   1.5  1.8 

 

*Lifestyle has been considered to reflect that of a 12-16 year old school going boy.   
PAR values were taken from reference11   
PAL = Total PAR-HR / Total duration 
Recess playtime, and ‘intermittent fun-play’ were assumed to be unfocussed play, with rest periods. TV 
sedentary activity refers to time at home, spent watching TV, or at a computer/ play station, or in light 
household chores. 
The differences between the two lifestyle patterns are a) the extra intense game playtime, b) 50% reduction 
in sedentary/ TV time and c) active self-transport to school, i.e., not using motorized transport.  

 

Table 4.15 shows energy acquired during growth: energy equivalent for 1g protein = 5.65 kcal, 
1 g fat = 9.25 kcal. 
 

The weight gain during growth and overall energy requirement taking growth into consideration 
for boys and girls, are shown in Tables 4.21a and 4.21b respectively.  In these Tables, physical activity 
levels (computed as the ratio of the predicted TEE and the predicted BMR for each age group) are 
also presented. Since there is no recent evidence to show that the BMR of Indian children is lower 
than that of their Western counterparts, the present committee retains the BMR derived from the 
FAO/WHO/UNU 200411. BMR prediction equations were used to predict BMR, while TEE was 
predicted from the quadratic prediction equation given earlier in this section. 

 

It is clear from the Tables (4.21a and 4.21b) that the activity level, or PAL, used in the children’s 
TEE calculation, was high. This is because of the quadratic equation used to predict TEE; and it is 
worth considering the type of activities and the time spent in them that could lead to a PAL of 1.8.  
Table 4.21c depicts a typical lifestyle that would be required for an adolescent aged between 12-16 
years, to have a PAL of 1.8. 

 

To illustrate this point, actual measurements of TEE have been performed by the DLW method 
in Indian children aged 8-9 years37. These values (in middle class South Indian children) were 1458 
kcal/day and 1338 kcal/day in boys and girls respectively (Table 4.8).  The physical activity level 
(PAL) in these children was 1.4, which is low and indicative of sedentary habits. It should be 

55 
 



emphasized again, that the prediction equation for TEE (quadratic equation proposed by 
FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004, assumes a moderately active child as the reference11.  This means that for a 
child aged 8-9, PAL would be about 1.6 (Table 4.21c), which is higher than what was observed in 
sedentary Indian children (Table 4.8)37. This is a cause for concern, if the observed PAL is indicative 
of all Indian children.  It should be emphasized that children need to be physically active such that 
they meet the PAL values indicated in Table 4.21a and 4.21b, and that the activity should increase in 
the teens to a PAL of 1.8. However, as further evidence on Indian children is not yet available these 
same recommendations as the previous Committee’s recommendation is continued. 

 

Table 4.21d below, gives some play activities and their PAR. These can be used as in Table 
4.16c, to calculate PAL values in any given lifestyle pattern. 

 

To calculate the requirement of sedentary children, PAL would be 15% less than that in 
moderately active children, and for highly active children, PAL would be 15% higher. Therefore, for 
a 9-10-year-old boy, sedentary PAL would be about 1.40 and for highly active in the same age, it 
would be 1.90. The TEE would change in a 
similar manner. Tables 4.21e and 4.21f give Table 4.21d: PAR values for some activities* 
the requirements (including energy required 
for growth) for a child who is sedentary, as Average PAR11 

Activity 
well as for children who are very active.  Males Females 

 Sleeping 1.0 1.0 
It is therefore emphasized that while 

computing the energy needs of children, the Sitting quietly 1.2 1.2 

median weight of the group should be taken Reading 1.3 1.5 
into account. Recommendations for the Standing 1.4 1.5 
energy intake of children, based on Tables 

Dressing 2.4 3.3 
4.21a and 4.21b, should include 
recommendations for appropriate physical Walking slowly 2.8 3.0 

activity as well, without which they cannot Walking briskly 3.8 3.8 
remain healthy. While no data are available Cycling 5.6 3.6 
on the optimum level of physical activity, it is 

Running – sprint 8.2 8.3 
recommended that children should engage in 
moderately intense physical activity at least Running- long distance 6.3 6.6 
for one hour per day.  This need not be carried Basketball 7.0 7.7 
out at a stretch and can be accumulated in 

Football 8.0 - 
bouts of 10-20 minutes. The moderately 
intense physical activity includes activities Swimming 9.0 - 

that have body displacement and physical *It must be stressed that these are average PAR values 
effort and can be achieved through individual reported within a single study, or averaged across 
activities such as walking, running or cycling, different studies. The range of reported values can be 
or team sports and games. around greater than 10% on either side, especially at 

 low PAR activities. 
4.9. Other considerations in computing  

energy requirements and intake 

Source of energy in Indian diets 
 

The main sources of energy in Indian diets, which are predominantly plant food based, are 
carbohydrate, fat and protein. The recent scientific update considers the unhealthy role of simple 
sugars and recommends less than 10% of total energy while recommending a wide range of 
carbohydrate (55-75%) intake from whole grains and legumes, vegetables and fruits55. 

  

56 
 



Table 4.21e: Energy requirements and PAL of Indian boys at different activity levels* 
 

 Sedentarya Vigorous Activityb 

Total energy Total Energy Total Energy Total Energy 
Age Weight require- require- require require- 

PAL P
mentd AL 

(y) (kg) mentc mentd mentc 

(kcal/d) (kcal/kg/d) (kcal/d) (kcal/kg/d) 

5-6 18.5 1210 65 1.3 1680 90 1.8 

6-7 20.5 1270 60 1.3 1760 90 1.8 

7-8 22.9 1350 60 1.3 1860 80 1.8 

8-9 25.4 1530 60 1.4 2070 80 1.9 

9-10 28.1 1610 60 1.4 2190 80 1.9 

10-11 31.2 1710 55 1.4 2320 75 1.9 

11-12 34.6 1920 55 1.5 2560 75 2.0 

12-13 38.9 2040 55 1.5 2720 70 2.0 

13-14 44.3 2190 50 1.5 3060 70 2.1 

14-15 50.6 2370 50 1.5 3300 65 2.1 

15-16 56.6 2690 50 1.6 3520 60 2.1 

16-17 61.3 2810 45 1.6 3680 60 2.1 

17-18 64.8 2910 45 1.6 3810 60 2.1 

18-19 67.3 2970 45 1.6 3890 60 2.1 
 

* To be studied in conjunction with Table 4.21a, which represents energy needs for moderate activity.  Energy 
needs calculated for sedentary and vigorous activity, as given in text above, and include energy required for 
growth (as in Table 4.16a). Age and weights taken from Table 4.21a; the total energy requirement for each 
age band is for a child who has attained the 95th percentile for weight.  For other weight requirements, use 
the kcal/kg/day column and multiply by the target weight of the population. 

a Sedentary activity would be typical of a child who did not engage in organized sport/games and went to 
school by motorized means.  See Table 4.21c for example.   

b Vigorous activity would mean walking or cycling long distances every day, engaging in high 
intensity/energy demanding chores or games for several hours, or intensively practicing sports for several 
hours a day and several days in a week.  

c Rounded off to the nearest 10 kcal/day 
d Rounded off to the nearest 5 kcal/kg/day 

 

57 
 



Table 4.21f: Energy requirements and PAL of Indian girls at different activity levels* 
 

 Sedentary Activitya Vigorous Activityb 

Total energy Total Energy Total Energy Total energy 
Age Weight require- require- require- require- 

PAL PA
mentd L 

(y) (kg) mentc mentd mentc 

(kcal/d) (kcal/kg/d) (kcal/d) (kcal/kg/d) 

5-6 18.3 1130 60 1.3 1560 85 1.8 

6-7 20.2 1180 60 1.3 1620 80 1.8 

7-8 22.4 1330 60 1.4 1710 75 1.8 

8-9 25.0 1410 55 1.4 1900 75 1.9 

9-10 28.2 1500 50 1.4 2030 70 1.9 

10-11 31.9 1590 50 1.4 2150 70 1.9 

11-12 36.2 1790 50 1.5 2380 65 2.0 

12-13 41.2 1890 50 1.5 2510 60 2.0 

13-14 46.0 1990 45 1.5 2640 60 2.0 

14-15 50.1 2070 40 1.5 2750 55 2.0 

15-16 52.8 2110 40 1.5 2810 55 2.0 

16-17 54.7 2150 40 1.5 2860 50 2.0 

17-18 55.7 2160 40 1.5 3030 55 2.1 

18-19 56.7 2180 40 1.5 3050 55 2.1 

* To be studied in conjunction with Table 4.21b, which represents energy needs for moderate activity. Energy 
needs calculated for sedentary and vigorous activity, as given in text above, and include energy required for 
growth (as in Table 4.21b). Age and weights taken from Table 4.21b; the total energy requirement for each 
age band is for a child who has attained the 95th percentile for weight. For other weight requirements, use 
the kcal/kg/day column and multiply by the target weight of the population. 

 

a Sedentary activity would be typical of a child who does not engage in organized sport/games and goes to 
school by motorized means. See Table 4.21c for example.   

 

b Vigorous activity would mean walking or cycling long distances every day, engaging in high 
intensity/energy demanding chores or games for several hours, or intensively practicing sports for several 
hours a day and several days in a week.  

 

c Rounded off to the nearest 10 kcal/day 
 

d Rounded off to the nearest 5 kcal/kg/day 
 
 

58 
 



Dietary fiber forms an indigestible and important component of plant foods and was until now 
never considered as sources of energy in the food composition tables. The present Indian food 
composition has included this in estimation of metabolizable energy by calculating carbohydrate by 
difference using the difference between 100 minus the sum of proximate components including 
dietary fibre56. Dietary fiber, some of which are soluble and some insoluble undergo fermentation in 
the colon and yield short chain fatty acids, such as butyric, propionic and acetic acids which are 
utilized as sources of energy by the colonic cells and by the liver. Hence, they are known to yield 
energy, 2.6 kcal/g from fermentable foods and no energy from non-fermentable fiber. In conventional 
foods, 70% of fiber is fermentable: In general, in foods, energy conversion factor for fiber is taken as 
2.0 kcal/g. Currently recommended metabolizable energy (ME) factor for different components of 
food is as follows:           
             kcal /g  

Protein   4    
Fat    9   
Carbohydrate  4    
Dietary fiber  2   

 
Unlike in earlier years, the present Indian food composition table has recalculated the energy 

yield of various foods on the basis of their revised content of carbohydrates, proteins, fat and dietary 
fiber.  

4.10. A consideration regarding recommendation for adults 

 Table 4.23 below gives the current recommendation as a single daily energy requirement value 
for adults. These values of the daily energy requirement are based on the reference body weights for 
Indian men and women, which were estimated for a theoretical individual with a BMI of 21 kg/m2 
and a nominal height that was the 95th percentile of the height distribution from the NNMB, 2016 
survey (for more details refer chapter – 3). It is evident that the 95th percentile value for height is an 
aspirational value. However, if the nominal height were taken to be the 50th percentile value of the 
NNMB height distribution, along with a BMI of 21 kg/m2, the reference body weight would be lower, 
and consequently, the single value for the daily energy requirement will be lower. The difference in 
body weight, between using the 50th and 95th percentile value for height in this calculation is about 5 
kg.  

 The present expert committee deliberated on which reference body weight to use for the single 
value for the daily energy requirement and decided that for the purpose of this specific 
recommendation, the 95th percentile height value and a BMI of 21 kg/m2 would be used, as an 
aspirational height was desirable.  However, it also recommended that as far as possible, energy intake 
recommendations for a normal healthy population should be based on the actual weight and physical 
activity level of the target population. When this is unknown, the single value recommendation can 
be used.   

 There is always an inherent risk of excess consumption of energy with these approaches, that 
recommends single daily energy intake in some population. This is mitigated by two approaches: 
first, to try and ensure that energy requirements for groups are based on their average weight and 
physical activity levels. If the target group has a higher than ideal body weight, based on their BMI, 
appropriate considerations should be made for an energy intake appropriate for their ideal weight. 
Second, that adequate physical activity should be carried out at any BMI and energy intake level. It 
is critical to maintain a healthy body weight and prevent overweight or obesity. Details on the type 
and duration of physical activity to be performed are described in the section below. 

59 
 



4.11. Recommendations on physical activity for a sedentary lifestyle 

 Physical activity is a key determinant of energy expenditure and therefore is fundamental to 
maintain energy balance and body weight. Additionally, physical activity has protective role to 
human body as it reduces the risk for coronary heart disease, stroke, diabetes, hypertension and some 
cancers. For adults, the physical activity includes leisure time physical activity, commute to work (by 
walking or cycling), occupational, household chores (cleaning, cooking, washing etc.,) or 
exercises/sports (aerobic exercises).  

 Based on the WHO 2010, adults (18-64 y) are recommended to perform 150 min of Moderate 
to Vigorous Physical Activity (MVPA) per week, or 75 min of Vigorous Physical Activity (VPA) per 
week.57 The type of physical activity should be aerobic, meaning an activity which involve large 
muscles of the body to move in rhythmic manner for a sustained period of time. For example, brisk 
walking, running, swimming, bicycling etc. In order to meet the recommendation of 150 min/week 
MVPA, daily 20 min of physical activity can be performed. For individuals having sedentary 
occupation, the 20 min/d physical activity can be achieved by walking or cycling to work. For elderly, 
the recommendation on physical activity is same as adults, however, the elderly who cannot perform 
the recommended physical activity due to certain health problems are advised to be as physically 
active as per their abilities and conditions allow.  

 
An example of dividing a day’s Table 4.22: Example of type of physical activity 

time to perform physical activity for an performed in a day 

individual with sedentary occupation is Duration 
presented in Table 4.22. Note that as the Activity 

(min) 
duration of the activity is less in this type Sleep 480 
of activity pattern, it is essential to Occupation (work) 480 
include the inclusion of MVPA, which Personal care/eating/watching TV 180 
can increase the PAL to 1.43. In order to Household chores (cleaning, 
further increase PAL to 1.5, the duration 220 

cooking or washing utensils) 
of MVPA should be increased to 30 Leisure time physical activity 
min/d. Another way to increase PAL to (walking in slow pace, gardening, 60 
1.5 is by avoiding sitting for long dancing etc.) 
durations and increase the time spent in Aerobic exercise (brisk walking, 
standing and walking/moving around to 20 

running, swimming, cycling etc.)* 
at least 1-2 h/d. These should be carried 
out over and above the recommended *Recommendation of 150 min/week of MVPA can be met 

minimum duration of MVPA (20 min/d).   by performing 20 min of MVPA daily. These aerobic 
exercises should be performed in bouts of at least 10 min 

 
duration. 

4.12. Summary of recommended 
 

energy requirement for Indians 
 

The final recommended energy levels at different ages are given in Table 4.23. The comparison 
of energy requirement proposed by present committee and ICMR 2010 is given in Table 4.24. 

 
 
 
 

 
  

60 
 



Table 4.23: Energy requirements of Indians at different ages 
 

Age Requirement 
Category Body weights 

Group (kcal/d)a (kcal/kg/day) 

Sedentary work 65.0 2110 32 

Men Moderate work 65.0 2710 42 

Heavy work 65.0 3470 53 

Sedentary work 55.0 1660 30 

Moderate work 55.0 2130 39 

Heavy work 55.0 2720 49 
Women 

Pregnant 55.0 + GWGb + 350  

+600 
Lactating 55.0+c  

+520 
0-6 m 5.8 550 95 

Infants 

6-12m 8.5 670 80 

1-3y 11.7 1010 86 
Childrend 4-6y 18.3 1360 74 

7-9 y 25.3 1700 67 

Boys 10-12y 34.9 2220 64 

Girls 10-12y 36.4 2060 57 

Boys 13-15y 50.5 2860 57 

Girls 13-15y 49.6 2400 49 

Boys 16-18y 64.4 3320 52 

Girls 16-18y 55.7 2500 45 
 

aRounded off to the nearest 10 kcal/d 
bGWG – Gestational Weight Gain. Energy need in pregnancy should be adjusted for actual 
bodyweight, observed weight gain and activity pattern for the population. 
cGestational Weight Gain remaining after delivery 
dEnergy needs of children and adolescents have been computed for reference children and 
adolescents; these reference children were assumed to have a moderate daily physical activity level. 
The actual requirement in specific population groups should be adjusted for the actual weight and 
physical activity of that population (see Table 4.21e and 4.21f), especially when computing the gap 
between energy requirement and actual intake that needs to be filled by supplementation programmes.  

 
  

61 
 



Table 4.24: Energy requirement (kcal/d) as proposed by ICMR 2020 
 

ICMR ICMR 
Diff

Age group Category 2020 201013 erence 

Kcal/d 

Sedentary worka 2110 2320 -210 

Adult Men Moderate worka 2710 2730 -20 

Heavy worka 3470 3490 -20 

Sedentary worka 1660 1900 -240 

Moderate worka 2130 2230 -100 

Heavy worka 2720 2850 -130 
Adult Women 

Pregnant + 350 + 350 -- 

Lactating (0-6m) +600 +600 -- 

Lactating (7-12m) +520 +520 -- 

0-6 months 550 520 +30 
Infants 

6-12 months 670 670 -- 

1-3 y 1010 1060 -50 

Children 4-6 y 1360 1350 +10 

7-9 y 1700 1690 +10 

Boys 10-12 y 2220 2190 +30 

Girls 10-12 y 2060 2010 +50 

Boys 13-15 y 2860 2750 +110 

Girls 13-15 y 2400 2330 +70 

Boys 16-18 y 3320 3020 +300 

Girls 16-18 y 2500 2440 +60 
 

a Energy requirement calculated as “BMR x PAL”. Refer section 4.5, Table 4.11 and Table 4.13 
for details in BMR and PAL values. 

  

62 
 



References 

1. Garry RC, Passmore R, Warnock GM, Durnin JV. Studies on expenditure of energy and consumption 
of food by miners and clerks, Fife, Scotland, 1952. Studies on Expenditure of Energy and Consumption 
of Food by Miners and Clerks, Fife, Scotland, 1952. 1955(289). 

2. Nutrition Advisory Committee of the Indian Research Fund Association (IRFA). Report of the Twelfth 
Meeting, IRFA, New Delhi, 1944. 

3. Patwardhan VN. Dietary Allowances for Indians. Calorie Requirements. Special Report. Indian Council 
of Medical Research. 1960(35):1-20. 

4. FAO. Calorie requirements. Report of the Second Committee on Calorie Requirements. FAO Nutritional 
Studies, no. 15, Rome: 1957. 

5. Kumar S, Kumar N, Sachar RS. Basal metabolic rate in normal Indian adult males. Indian Journal of 
Medical Research. 1961; 49:702-9. 

6. Banerjee S. Studies in Energy Metabolism. Studies in Energy Metabolism. 1962(43). 

7. Rao MN, Sen G, Saha PN, Devi AS. Physiological norms in Indians. Pulmonary capacities in health. 
Physiological Norms in Indians. Pulmonary Capacities in Health. 1961(38). 

8. Åstrand I. Degree of strain during building work as related to individual aerobic work capacity. 
Ergonomics. 1967 May 1; 10(3):293-303. 

9. Ramanamurthy PS, Dakshayani R. Energy intake and expenditure in stone cutters. Indian journal of 
medical research. 1962; 50:804-9. 

10. Joint FAO/WHO/UNU, Energy and Protein Requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert 
Consultants, WHO Technical Report Series 724, 1985. 

11. FAO F. Nutrition Technical Report Series 1: Human Energy Requirements. Report of a joint 
FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation 2001. Rome FAO, 2004. 

12. Indian Council of Medical Research. Expert Group. Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary 
Allowances for Indians: A Report of the Expert Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research. Indian 
Council of Medical Research; 1990. 

13. NIN N. requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A Report of the Expert Group 
of Indian Council of Medical Research, National Institute of Nutrition, ICMR, Hyderabad. 2010. 

14. Haggarty P, Valencia ME, McNeill G, Gonzales NL, Moya SY, Pinelli A, Quihui L, Saucedo MS, 
Esparza J, Ashton J, Milne E. Energy expenditure during heavy work and its interaction with body 
weight. British Journal of Nutrition. 1997 Mar; 77(3):359-73. 

15. Kuriyan R, Easwaran PP, Kurpad AV. Physical activity ratio of selected activities in Indian male and 
female subjects and its relationship with body mass index. British journal of nutrition. 2006 Jan; 
96(1):71-9. 

16. Jeukendrup A, Diemen AV. Heart rate monitoring during training and competition in cyclists. Journal 
of sports sciences. 1998 Jan 1; 16(sup1):91-9. 

17. Bandyopadhyay B, Chattopadhyay H. Energy metabolism in male college students. The Indian Journal 
of Medical Research. 1980 Jun; 71:961-9. 

18. Banerjee B. Resting metabolic rate and energy cost of some common daily activities of trained and 
untrained tropical people. Energy metabolism in training in tropics. 

19. Kanade AN, Gokhale MK, Rao S. Energy costs of standard activities among Indian adults. European 
journal of clinical nutrition. 2001 Aug; 55(8):708-13. 

20. OBEROI K, DHILLON MK, Miglani SS. A study of energy expenditure during manual and machine 
washing of clothes in India. Ergonomics. 1983 Apr 1; 26(4):375-8. 

21. Rao S, Gokhale M, Kanade A. Energy costs of daily activities for women in rural India. Public health 
nutrition. 2008 Feb; 11(2):142-50. 

22. Sujatha T, Shatrugna V, Venkataramana Y, Begum N. Energy expenditure on household, childcare and 
occupational activities of women from urban poor households. British Journal of Nutrition. 2000 May; 
83(5):497-503.  

63 
 



23. Ramana Murthy PS, Belavady B. Energy expenditure and requirement in agricultural labourers. Indian 
Journal of Medical Research. 1966; 54(10):977-.  

24. Nag PK, Dutt P. Circulo-respiratory efficiency in some agricultural work. Applied ergonomics. 1980 
Jun 1; 11(2):81-4. 

25. Nag PK, Chatterjee SK. Physiological reactions of female workers in Indian agricultural work. Human 
factors 1981; 23(5):607-14. 

26. Das SK, Saha H. Climbing efficiency with different modes of load carriage. The Indian journal of 
medical research. 1966 Sep; 54(9):866. 

27. Samanta A, Chatterjee BB. A physiological study of manual lifting of loads in Indians. Ergonomics 
1981; 24(7):557-64. 

28. Samanta A, Datta SR, Roy BN, Chatterjee A, Mukherjee PK. Estimation of maximum permissible loads 
to be carried by Indians of different ages. Ergonomics 1987; 30(5):825-31. 

29. Datta SR, Chatterjee BB, Roy BN. The energy cost of rickshaw pulling. Ergonomics 1978; 21(11):879-
86. 

30. Datta SR, Chatterjee BB, Roy BN. The energy cost of pulling handcarts (‘thela’). Ergonomics 1983; 
26(5):461-4. 

31. Ramanamurthy PS, Dakshayani R. Energy intake and expenditure in stone cutters. Indian journal of 
medical research. 1962; 50:804-9. 

32. Pal AK, Sinha DK. The energy cost of metalliferous mining operations in relation to the aerobic capacity 
of Indian miners. Ergonomics 1994; 37(6):1047-54. 

33. Rodahl K. Physiology of Work. CRC Press; 1989 Nov 13. 

34. Lifson N, Gordon GB, McClintock R. Measurement of total carbon dioxide production by means of 
D2O18. Journal of Applied Physiology. 1955 May 1; 7(6):704-10. 

35. Klein PD, James WP, Wong WW, Irving CS, Murgatroyd PR, Cabrera M, Dallosso HM, Klein ER, 
Nichols BL. Calorimetric validation of the doubly-labelled water method for determination of energy 
expenditure in man. Human nutrition. Clinical nutrition. 1984 Mar; 38(2):95. 

36. Borgonha S, Shetty PS, Kurpad AV. Total energy expenditure and physical activity in chronically 
undernourished Indian males measured by the doubly labeled water method. Indian Journal of Medical 
Research. 2000; 111:24-32. 

37. Krishnaveni GV, Veena SR, Kuriyan R, Kishore RP, Wills AK, Nalinakshi M, Kehoe S, Fall CH, 
Kurpad AV. Relationship between physical activity measured using accelerometers and energy 
expenditure measured using doubly labelled water in Indian children. European journal of clinical 
nutrition. 2009 Nov; 63(11):1313-9. 

38. Sinha S, Devi S, Kurpad AV, Kuriyan R. Declining energy expenditure among millennials: Revisiting 
the daily energy requirement. Proceedings of Annual conference of Nutrition Society of India – Poster 
presented at 50thNSI conference (15-17 Nov 2018). 

39. WHO Multicentre Growth Reference Study Group. WHO Child Growth Standards based on 
length/height, weight and age. Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway: 1992). Supplement. 2006 Apr; 450:76.  

40. Soares MJ, Shetty PS. Validity of Schofield's predictive equations for basal metabolic rates of Indians. 
The Indian journal of medical research. 1988 Sep; 88:253. 

41. Piers LS, Shetty PS. Basal metabolic rates of Indian women1. Energy metabolism during the menstrual 
cycle, pregnancy and lactation in well-nourished Indian women. 1993 Aug 1; 47:19. 

42. Shetty PS, Soares MJ, Sheela ML. Basal metabolic rates of South Indian males. Bangalore, India: FAO. 
1986. 

43. Henry CJ, Rees DG. New predictive equations for the estimation of basal metabolic rate in tropical 
peoples. European journal of clinical nutrition. 1991 Apr 1; 45 (4):177-85. 

44. Ferro-Luzzi A, Petracchi C, Kuriyan R, Kurpad AV. Basal metabolism of weight-stable chronically 
undernourished men and women: lack of metabolic adaptation and ethnic differences. The American 
journal of clinical nutrition. 1997 Nov 1; 66(5):1086-93. 

64 
 



45. Swaminathan S, Sinha S, Minocha S, Makkar S, Kurpad AV. Are we eating too much? A critical 
reappraisal of the energy requirement in Indians. Proceedings of the Indian National Science Academy. 
2018 Nov 13; 84(4):809-19.  

46. Anjana RM, Pradeepa R, Das AK, Deepa M, Bhansali A, Joshi SR, Joshi PP, Dhandhania VK, Rao PV, 
Sudha V, Subashini R. Physical activity and inactivity patterns in India–results from the ICMR-INDIAB 
study (Phase-1)[ICMR-INDIAB-5]. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. 
2014 Dec 1; 11(1):26. 

47. Mayer J, Roy PU, Mitra KP. Relation between caloric intake, body weight, and physical work: studies 
in an industrial male population in West Bengal. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1956 Mar 
1; 4 (2):169-75. 

48. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau. Report of Second Repeat Survey—Rural (1996–1997). 
Technical report series No. 18. 1996. 

49. Kashyap S. Maternal work and nutrition profile of the pregnant and nursing mothers and their offspring 
among the quarry workers in Delhi-a prospective study. Unpublished Doctorate Dissertation. 1993. 

50. Madhavapeddi R, Rao BS. Energy balance in lactating undernourished Indian women. European journal 
of clinical nutrition. 1992 May 1; 46(5):349-54. 

51. Prema K, Madhavapeddi R, Ramalakshmi BA. Changes in anthropometric indices of nutritional status 
in lactating women [India]. Nutrition reports international. 1981. 

52. Shannawaz M, Arokiasamy P. Overweight/Obesity: An Emerging Epidemic in India. Journal of Clinical 
& Diagnostic Research. 2018 Nov 1; 12: LC01-LC05. 

53. Goel A, Devi T, Kalaivani K, Ramachandran P. Dual nutrition burden in urban women from low income 
families. Indian Journal of Nutrition & Dietetics. 2020; 57:10-24.  

54. Goel A, Devi T, Kalaivani K, Ramachandran P. Effect of lactation on nutritional status in urban women 
from low middle income families. Indian Journal of Nutrition & Dietetics. 2020; 57:222-239. 

55. Mann J, Cummings JH, Englyst HN, Key T, Liu S, Riccardi G, Summerbell C, Uauy R, Van Dam RM, 
Venn B, Vorster HH. FAO/WHO scientific update on carbohydrates in human nutrition: conclusions. 
European journal of clinical nutrition. 2007 Dec; 61(1):S132-7. 

56. Longvah T, An̲antan̲ I, Bhaskarachary K, Venkaiah K, Longvah T. Indian food composition tables. 
Hyderabad: National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research; 2017. 

57. World Health Organization. WHO Global recommendations on physical activity for health. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2011. 

 

65 
 



5. PROTEIN AND AMINO ACIDS 
 

 
Dietary proteins provide amino acids for the synthesis of body proteins, which are structural 

and biologically active proteins (i.e. enzymes, hormones), and for other biologically important 
nitrogenous compounds. Adequate dietary protein is essential during growth when new tissue 
proteins are being synthesized. In an adult, dietary protein is essential for synthesis of new proteins 
to replace those that are being broken down. During pregnancy, additional protein is necessary for 
synthesis of foetal, placental and maternal body proteins that increase with increase in maternal body 
weight. In lactating women, additional protein is necessary for synthesis of breast milk proteins. 

 

Dietary proteins should supply the nine nutritionally essential amino acids (EAA), of the total 
twenty, in proper proportions and in adequate quantities to synthesize tissue proteins in the body. The 
other eleven amino acids, though required for protein synthesis, are not considered nutritionally 
essential since the body can synthesize them from other carbon and N sources. Since most of the body 
N requirements are met by protein nitrogen, protein and N requirements are used interchangeably. 

  

Human protein requirements are determined by methods such as (a) N balance and                          
(b) Obligatory N losses adjusted for efficiency of protein utilization1. Recently, the Indicator Amino 
Acid Oxidation (IAAO) method has been used to define protein requirements for adult men and 
children, however, the method reports significantly higher values than the current recommendation2 
and are not used in the present report. At present, greater reliance is placed on the N balance method, 
which reflects the physiological condition of the subject and provides a true estimate of the protein 
requirement of the body at different ages. The 1985 and 2007 recommendations of FAO/WHO/UNU 
Consultations3,4 are based largely on N balance method.  

 

Globally a considerable experimental data on N balance in adults are available and these are 
useful in establishing the protein requirements. There have been some systematic studies on N 
balance in children and protein accretion studies in infants, children, pregnant and lactating mothers 
consuming their habitual diets, which are useful in arriving at the protein requirement for these 
physiological groups4. 
 
5.1. Protein Requirements 
 

5.1.1. Protein requirements of adults 
 

Taking into consideration the available data on protein requirements of Indians of different age 
groups in relation to ICMR recommendations of 1978, 1989, 2010 and the FAO/WHO/UNU/ 
Consultations of 1985 and 2007, the present Expert Group of the ICMR adopted the following 
guidelines in fixing the protein requirement of Indians from different physiological age groups. 
 

1. The human protein requirement should satisfy the currently established indispensable amino acid 
requirements as recommended by FAO/WHO/UNU Consultation of 20074. 

2. N balance data (both long term and short term) obtained in normal, healthy well-nourished 
subjects should form the basis of fixing adequateN (and protein) requirements. 

3. Daily protein requirement of different age groups should be expressed as gram per kg (g/kg). The 
safe level of requirement should be expressed as Mean + 1.96 SD while Mean – 1.96 SD should 
indicate the minimal requirement. These two extremes include 95% of the entire population 
within their limits, which extend to the 97.5 and 2.5 percentile of the populations respectively. 

4. The daily requirement of protein for individuals of different age groups should be derived by a 
two-step process: First, the level of requirement per kg according to age has to be chosen and then 

66 
 



the actual daily requirement has to be computed for a given age by multiplying the requirement 
per kg by the standard age specific body weights (as per the standard weights provided in Chapter 
3 Table 3.6). For adolescents (10-18 years) and adults, the requirement needs to be categorized 
by gender. 

5.  In the 1985 recommendations of FAO/WHO/UNU, the available long-term N balance studies 
were considered, and the minimal protein requirement of 0.60 g/kg/day for adults was 
recommended3. However, the FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 Consultation considered all the available 
N balance studies (~ 19) with a total of 235 healthy adult subjects. A zero N balance was 
considered to be the criterion for estimating the protein requirement. A median N requirement of 
105 mg N/kg/day (equivalent to 0.66 g protein/kg/day) was derived from the log normal 
distribution (corresponding to a median value of 4.65 on the log scale), with 95% confidence 
intervals as 101 and 110 mg N/kg/day, for the entire sample of 235 subjects weighted equally. In 
addition, considering an intra- and inter-study variability, and intra- and inter individual 
variability, the consultation arrived at an estimate of 0.12 as the between-individual SD of the log 
requirement. On basis of this, the safe intake was calculated as the log median intake plus 1.96 × 
0.12. This value was further exponentiated to arrive at a safe requirement of 133 mg N/kg/day4. 

6. Based on the above estimates of median and safe N requirements i.e. 105 mg N/kg/day and 133 
mg N/kg/day, the protein requirements would be 0.66 g/kg/day and 0.83 g/kg/day respectively 
after multiplying by a factor of 6.25. This value is similar to that reported by FAO/WHO/UNU, 
20074. 
 

The earlier committee had applied a protein digestibility amino acid score (PDCAAS) 
correction to the safe protein intake for all the age groups. This was based on the low digestibility of 
a standard Indian diet ofabout 85%. However, the protein requirement is estimated for a high-quality 
protein. Specific dietary proteins to meet this requirement should be corrected for their specific 
PDCAAS values. The present committee has therefore removed the PDCAAS correction for safe 
protein intake for all the age groups.  
 
Factorial method forcalculating protein requirements for maintainencein adults 
 

The factorial method of assessing protein requirement of an individual involves estimation of 
obligatory loss of N through faeces, urine and skin (primarily sweat), and miscellaneous means (e.g., 
hair, tooth brushing, and exhaled ammonia). The obligatory loss of urinary and faecal N has been 
assessed by maintaining an individual on a protein-free diet and estimating the faecal and urinary N 
excretion. In the FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 report, the protein requirement is defined as the minimum 
intake of N that enables N equilibrium (zero N balance). A meta-analysis was conducted on 19 
published N balance studies to estimate adequate N intake or maintenance requirements in healthy 
adults6. The studies were classified into three major types a) estimation studies: presented N balance 
data for individual subjects at ≥3 intakes of N, b) obligatory studies: measured endogenous or 
obligatory N losses with very low amounts of dietary protein, c) test studies: estimated requirements 
with individuals consuming 1 or 2 specific N intake involving longer experimental periods.  

 

Considering the estimates of individual requirements with a minimum of three N intakes and 
adjusting for the confounding factors like climate of the study sites, age, sex and dietary protein 
sources of the subjects, the median basal N requirement was 48 mg N/kg/day6. This was derived from 
the intercept of the linear regression of N balance on intake, which gives the N loss at zero intake and 
was similar to the median value of 47 mg N/kg/day obtained from 14 studies that had been designed 
to actually measure the obligatory requirement6. There are several factors that can influence this loss, 
principally the energy intake. In terms of protein, this obligatory N loss corresponds to a value of 0.3 
g protein/kg/day. However, the efficiency of utilization of protein being relatively low at about 47%6, 

67 
 



the requirement of protein would then be the amount required to replace the obligatory loss divided 
by the efficiency of utilization. This would be 0.64 g protein/kg/day, which is similar to the median 
requirement of 0.66 g protein/kg/day, found in the meta-analysis of N balance responses from 19 
separate studies on 235 individuals6. In addition, assuming a CV of 12.5%, the safe intake would be 
0.83 g protein/kg/d. 
 

5.1.2. Protein requirement during pregnancy 
 

Protein requirement during pregnancy has been previously assessed by the factorial method as 
the additional requirement for foetal growth and expansion of maternal tissue. The FAO/WHO/UNU 
1985 Consultation3 and 1989 ICMR Expert Group7 on Recommended Dietary Allowances used this 
approach to derive protein requirements during pregnancy. The 1985 Consultation assessed protein 
needs on a calculated increment of 925 g protein, i.e. the average gain, plus 30% (2SD of birth 
weight), and used an efficiency of 70% for the conversion of dietary protein to foetal, placental, and 
maternal tissues. This gave safe levels of additional protein of 1.2, 6.1 and 10.7 g/day in the first, 
second and third trimesters respectively. On average, it was also decided that 6 g protein/day was 
recommended as the extra allowance throughout pregnancy, based on the assumption that more 
protein was deposited early in pregnancy, and that the rate of deposition was lower in later pregnancy. 

 

 The 2007 FAO/WHO/UNU Consultation4, while using the factorial and the N balance method, 
also considered newer data on protein deposition during pregnancy, using the total body potassium 
(TBK) method, in which the TBK accretion was measured in pregnant women, by whole body 
potassium counting. Using a conversion ratio of 2.15 mEq potassium/g N, potassium accretion was 
converted to nitrogen accretion, and a total of 686 g protein deposition during pregnancy was 
reported. The deposition however was not at a uniform rate across pregnancy. Detailed measurements 
of FFM, based on TBK and total body nitrogen (TBN) (measured by prompt-gamma neutron 
activation) in women during and after pregnancy, also showed that there was no net accretion or loss 
of protein during pregnancy, suggesting that during pregnancy protein was deposited only in the 
foeto-placental tissue4. 

 

 Similar data are available in Indian pregnant women8. Using a whole-body potassium counter 
which was constructed at St. John’s Research Institute9, accurate protein deposition measurements 
were made in Indian pregnant women. As with data used in the 2007 FAO/WHO/UNU Consultation, 
the naturally present radioactive isotope of potassium (40K) was used to measure potassium accretion 
during pregnancy. Urban, well-nourished pregnant women belonging to middle socioeconomic status 
were recruited in the first trimester of pregnancy and followed up till the birth of the baby. Potassium 
accretion was measured at the 1st trimester (≤13 weeks), 2nd trimester (14-26 weeks), 3rd trimester 
(27-40 weeks) and at birth (≤7 days). The mean gestational weight gain (GWG) of these 38 pregnant 
women was 10.7 kg8. Their mean potassium accretion was 0.04 g/d and 0.08 g/d during the second 
and thirdtrimester respectively, showing that the potassium accretion pattern was not uniform across 
the trimesters, similar to the pattern observed in the 2007 FAO/WHO/UNU Consultation report. A 
conversion ratio of 2.15 mEq potassium / g N (as mentioned above) was used to estimate the nitrogen 
accretion. Assuming that total body nitrogen (TBN) was incorporated into the protein, total body 
protein (g) can be estimated as 6.25 x TBN10. Mean protein accretion in Indian pregnant women 
gaining 10.7 kg was thus calculated to be 2.7 g/d and 5.7 g/d in the second and third trimester 
respectively. There was no net accretion or loss of protein during pregnancy, reaffirming that during 
pregnancy, protein gets deposited only into the foeto-placental tissue. To arrive at the dietary 
requirement, the protein accretion rates must be adjusted for an efficiency of utilisation of dietary 
protein. Details on the efficiency of utilization of dietary protein in pregnancy are mentioned below.    
 
 

68 
 



Nitrogen balance and efficiency of utilization in pregnancy 
 

In all, 273 metabolic balances were available, the majority of which were on women at or 
beyond 20 weeks of gestation. The average N retention was 1.8 g/d from 20 weeks onwards and 1.3 
g/d before 20 weeks. Miscellaneous N losses unaccounted for in these studies, were estimated to be 
0.5 g/d. The average theoretical retention (mean during whole pregnancy) was 0.53 g/d, but the 
observed N retention after correcting for miscellaneous N losses of 0.5 g/day was 1.1 g/day. The 
efficiency of N utilization calculated from these studies was very low, at about 26%. However, after 
the data were cleaned by removing 2 subjects with improbable values, the efficiency of utilization 
was found to be 42% (which is the value used to calculate the dietary protein requirement for 
deposition in Table 5.1). This figure was also reasonably close to 47% that was derived in non-
pregnant adults4. 

 

Factorial approach to defining requirements during pregnancy 
 

Using new data obtained from Indian pregnant women8, revised additional protein intakes 
needed during pregnancy were derived for India (Table 5.1). The protein deposition values, (2.7 g/d 
and 5.7 g/day for the second and third trimester respectively) were adjusted for the efficiency of 
dietary protein utilization, which was considered to be 42%. To this, were added the additional 
maintenance costs, which were based on the mid-trimester body weight of pregnant woman and the 
adult maintenance protein requirement value of 0.66 g/kg/d. The additional estimated average 
requirement (EAR) thus obtained for the gestational weight gain (GWG) of 10.7 kg, were 8.2 g/d and 
18.9 g/d in the second and third trimesters respectively. Assuming a coefficient of variation of 12.5%, 
the safe levels for additional protein intakes by trimesters were derived from the EAR. For a GWG 
of 10.7 kg, the safe levels were calculated to be 10.2 g/d and 23.6 g/d for the second and third 
trimesters respectively8. 

 

Since GWG has been observed to be 10-12 kg in Indian pregnant women from low to middle 
socioeconomic status, protein deposition and requirements for GWG of 10 kg and 12 kg were also 
computed. For a GWG of 10 kg, the protein deposition would be 2.5 g/d and 5.3 g/day for the second 
and third trimesters respectively (Table 5.1). For a GWG of 12 kg, if protein deposition was assumed 
to be proportional to GWG, a deposition rate of 3.0 g/d and 6.4 g/d was calculated for the second and 
third trimesters respectively (Table 5.2). Previous surveys11 (NNMB 1979) have also reported GWG 
of 8 kg. Using the new data7, protein deposition rates of 2.0 g/d and 4.3 g/d for the second and third 
trimesters respectively were calculated for a GWG of 8 kg. The safe levels for additional protein 
intakes were thus calculated to be 7.6 g/d and 17.6 g/d respectively. Comparison of the additional 
protein requirements for GWG of 8, 10 and 12 kg are presented in Table 5.3.  

 

Table 5.1: Revised recommendations for additional protein intake during pregnancy,               
for a 10.0 kg gestational weight gain 

 

Mid- Additional Mean extra 
Protein Dietary protein Safe 

Tri- trimester protein for protein 
deposited requirement forc intake 

mester weight maintenanceb requirement 
gaina (g/d) deposition (g/d) (g/d)e

 (kg) (g/d) (g/d)d  
 

2 2.5 1.6 2.5 6.0 7.6 9.5 
3 7.5 4.9 5.3 12.7 17.6 22.0 

a Women gaining 10.0 kg during gestation 
b Mid-term increase in weight x estimated average requirement for maintenance for adult 0.66 g/kg/d 
c Protein deposited, adjusted for a 42% efficiency of utilization  
d Estimated average requirement (EAR); Sum of extra maintenance plus protein deposited  
e Safe Intake = Mean extra protein requirement (EAR) + 1.96 x SD extra protein requirement (corresponding 
to a CV of 12.5%). This requirement refers to high quality protein that meets criteria for digestibility and amino 
acid score. 

69 
 



Table 5.2: Revised recommendations for additional protein intake                                           
during pregnancy, for a 12.0 kg gestational weight gain 

 

Dietary 
Mid- Additional Mean extra 

Protein protein Safe 
Trimes trimester protein for protein 

deposited requirement intake 
ter weight maintenance requirement 

gain (kg)a (g/d)b (g/d) for deposition (g/d)e 
 (g/d)d

(g/d)c  
 

2 3.0 2.0 3.0 7.2 9.1 11.4 

3 9.0 5.9 6.4 15.2 21.2 26.3 
 

a Women gaining 12.0 kg during gestation 
b Mid-term increase in weight x estimated average requirement for maintenance for adult 0.66 g/kg/d 
c Protein deposited, adjusted for a 42% efficiency of utilization  
d Estimated average requirement (EAR); Sum of extra maintenance plus protein deposited  
e Safe Intake = Mean extra protein requirement (EAR) + 1.96 x SD extra protein requirement (corresponding 
to a CV of 12.5%). This requirement refers to high quality protein that meets criteria for digestibility and amino 
acid score. 
 

Table 5.3: Comparison of the additional protein requirements in pregnancy                                
with the earlier 2010 ICMR recommendation 

 

Safe Intake (g/d) 
GWG 12 kg Trimester 1 Trimester 2 Trimester 3 

ICMR 2010 0.6 8.3 27.2 
ICMR 2020a 0.6 11.4 26.3 
GWG 10 kg 
ICMR 2010 0.5 6.9 22.7 
ICMR 2020a 0.5 9.5 22.0 
GWG 8 kg 
ICMR 2010 0.4 5.5 18.2 
ICMR 2020a 0.4 7.6 17.6 

aFor Trimester 1, values are retained from ICMR 20105 

 

The protein requirements would increase further, if it is met only by protein in the cereal-pulse-
milk based low cost Indian diet, which has a PDCAAS of 82.3%. Since, low cost Indian diet for 
sedentary non-pregnant and non-lactating women provides about 10.6% calories from protein, during  
the second and third trimester of pregnancy additional quality adjusted protein requirement demands  
consumption of more energy. Therefore, consumption of high-quality protein foods (such as milk or 
eggs) is recommended in pregnancy.  

 

These protein allowances, particularly during the 3rd trimester may appear high, and may 
suggest that protein supplements are required. However, this is not the case when one considers the 
diet in its totality. For example, if one considers a sedentary pregnant woman, whose pre-pregnant 
weight was 55 kg, GWG of 10-12 kg, an energy allowance of 350 kcal /day, and an extra allowance 
of about 22 – 26 g protein/day, the calculated PE ratio of the required diet would be about 11-13%. 
Therefore, the required P:E ratio of the diet does not increase dramatically despite the higher protein 
requirement during pregnancy. Indeed, the use of supplements that are very high in protein (greater 
than 34% P:E ratio) may have some adverse events.  

70 
 



It is therefore important that the higher intake of protein recommended during pregnancy should 
preferably be obtained from high-quality protein food sources, and not from commercial, high-protein 
supplements. It is also important to take into account the fact that these computations have been made 
for the reference woman gaining 10-12 kg GWG; when adjusted to the average Indian woman with 
pre-pregnancy weight of 47 kg and GWG of 7-8 kg during pregnancy, the EAR and the safe intake 
(as mentioned above) will be lower and could be met from cereal, pulse and milk-based vegetarian 
diets. Examples of low cost Indian vegetarian high protein diets for an adult woman during second 
and third trimester of pregnancy are given in Annexure 5.2. These vegetarian diets will provide an 
additional energy and protein requirement at each trimester for a GWG of 10 and 12 kg.  
 
5.1.3. Protein requirements during lactation 
 

A factorial approach has also been adopted to derive the protein requirements during lactation. 
The requirements have been computed based on secretion of 6.4 g protein per day in the milk for 0-
6 months and 5.0 g protein per day for 6-12 months. Earlier the FAO/WHO/UNU 1985 Consultation 
and ICMR 1989 Expert Group assessed the protein content of milk as N x 6.25. The WHO/FAO/UNU 
Expert Consultation then in 2007 used the mean concentrations of protein and non-protein N (NPN) 
in human milk to calculate the mean equivalent milk protein output. The human breast milk contains 
a relatively high concentration of non-protein N equivalent to about 20-27% of total milk N, much of 
it being urea. Therefore, for calculating the requirements, protein requirement was assumed to be only 
for the protein component of the total N in the breastmilk. A factor of 6.25 was used to convert the 
protein N in milk to protein equivalents. The efficiency of conversion of dietary N (EAR) to milk 
protein equivalents can be assumed to be 47% on Indian diets, as in case of non-pregnant adults. 
Taking 12.5% as the coefficient of variation and a 1.96 SD on the EAR, the safe intakes were 
calculated.   
 

The additional mean (EAR) and safe protein intakes at different months of lactation are given 
in Table 5.4. Round off figures would be 17 g/d as the safe allowance for a lactating woman during 
the first 6 months and 13 g/d after 6 months. 

 

Table 5.4: Additional protein requirements during lactation 
 

Milk NPN NPN Estimated 
Protein True 

Months Milk output protein protein Average Safe 
concentra- protein 

post- output corrected equi- require-
tionb equi- intaked 

 
partum (g/d) for IWLa valentb secreted 

 valent mentc (g/d) 
(g/L) (g/d) 

(g/d) (g/L) (g/d) (g/d) 

1-6 688 722 8.9 2.5 6.4 1.8 13.6 16.9 

6-12 583 612 8.1 2.1 5.0 1.3 10.6 13.2 

a Milk output corrected for insensible water loss (IWL) during test weighing measurement (5%) (Refer Table 
4.16) 
b Protein concentration of breastmilk has been taken from FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 report4; N converted to 
protein by using the factor 6.25;  
c Efficiency of milk protein synthesis taken as 47% 
d Mean + 1.96 SD assuming a coefficient of variation of 12.5% 
 

Nitrogen (N) balance during lactation 

A N balance study in Indian lactating women12 indicated a linear relationship between N 
balance and protein intake over a range of 60-100 g/d. Minimum protein required to maintain N 
balance in the subjects studied was found to be 1.5 g/kg/d, which after allowing for a high faecal N 
excretion, was found to be 1.2 g/kg/d. These figures are close to the derived estimates of protein 

71 
 



requirements during lactation, where, women with a weight of about 60 kg after delivery would meet 
the additional 19 g/d required for lactation in the first 6 months, by increasing their protein intake to 
about 1.1 g/kg/d.  

Overall, the higher level of protein required during pregnancy and lactation computed from N 
balance, when compared to normal requirements computed from the factorial method or amino acid 
index method, suggests that the efficiency of conversion of dietary N into foetal and other tissues 
during pregnancy or milk protein during lactation must be quite low and not 70% as assumed. 

5.1.4. Protein requirements in infants, children and adolescents 

Obligatory N loss and maintenance requirement  

Protein requirements of infants and children are usually computed by the factorial method. The 
maintenance requirement is first computed separately and to it the growth requirements are added. In 
the FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 Report4, for the maintenance requirement, 10 studies were available, that 
examined the relationship between protein intake and N balance both above and below maintenance. 
Data from these multiple N balance studies among children were analysed following a linear 
regression approach as described for adults. Individual data were fitted to the linear model. 

N Balance = A + (B x N intake) 

Where A (intercept) is the extrapolated N loss at zero N intake and B (slope) the corresponding 
efficiency of utilization. The following values were derived by regression analysis of data from N 
balance studies on children (0.5 to 12 years of age) from these studies. 

Maintenance requirement reported by FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 (mg N/kg/d): 

Individual studies (n=7)   :57 + (0.56 x N intake) 
All studies (n=10)    :57 + (0.58 x N intake) 
Only milk or egg based studies (n=4) :62 + (0.66 x N intake) 

 

While the above studies were based on a regression of N balance on N intake, three studies were 
available, where 57 subjects were measured for N losses at zero or very low protein intake to directly 
estimate their obligatory N loss. In these three studies, a meanSD value of 6312 mg N/kg/d was 
obtained as obligatory N loss. It may be noticed that the values for obligatory N loss, of 57 mg 
N/kg/day (from the N balance studies at different levels of N intake) and 63 mg N/kg/day (from the 
direct obligatory N loss studies) are similar. These values are also higher than obligatory N loss value 
of 47 mg N/kg/day in adult. 

In addition, the reported efficiency of utilization in these studies on infants and children was on 
an average 56-58%, and 66% in the case of studies with milk/egg. The maintenance requirement is 
computed from the obligatory N loss, divided by the efficiency of utilization. For all the N balance 
studies quoted above, this value would be 57.4/0.58 = 98 mg N/kg/day, and for the animal protein 
diets, this would be 61.6/0.66 = 93 g N/kg/day. The mean value for maintenance requirement reported 
in FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 Report was 108 and 110 mg N/kg/day for individual and overall estimates 
respectively, but lower at 93 mg N/kg/day in the animal protein (milk/egg) intake studies, which 
could be attributed to the better digestibility and efficiency of utilization of animal proteins4,6.  

Choosing an appropriate maintenance value in a range of ages with such a limited data set was 
difficult as pointed out in the FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 report. The value chosen for infants up to 6 
months of age was based on the maintenance value for milk/egg protein diets, which was 93 mg 
N/kg/day4. This works out to a protein intake of 0.58 g protein/kg/day. For children above 6 months, 
the value chosen was 110 mg N/kg/day corresponding to 0.68 g protein/kg/day, which was the mean 

72 
 



maintenance requirement from all the N balance studies quoted above. Since this requirement was 
close to the adult maintenance value, for children above 6 months of age the maintenance requirement 
was set at 0.66 g protein/kg/day, or similar to that in adults. In addition, there was no a priori reason 
to think that maintenance value in children would differ from that of adults, although the efficiency 
of utilization may change as growth occurs. Therefore, the critical change in this model occurs at 6 
months of age, which also matches the time at which complementary feeding is initiated in addition 
to breastfeeding.These new values for the maintenance requirement are lower than 120 mg N/kg/d 
(or 0.75 g protein/kg/day) reported by 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU consultation.  
 

Protein deposition and growth requirement pattern 
 

Protein deposited for growth from 0.5 to 18 years, together with an expression of amino acid 
composition of whole-body protein allows a substantial improvement in the factorial estimates for 
overall protein and nutritionally essential amino acid requirement during growth. The average daily 
rates of protein deposited have been derived from the measurement of whole body potassium13,14. 
 

Children from age 0-2 y 
 

In a longitudinal study, Butte et al13 followed 76 individual infants from birth to 2 years with 
measurements at birth 0.5, 3, 6, 9, 12, 18 and 24 months. Data on total protein of each of the 71 
individuals who had at least 5 data points including one at 18 or 24 months were fitted into individual 
quadratic equations: 

Total protein deposition = A + (B x age) + (C x age2) 
 

The derivatives of equations below describe the protein deposition per day for each child: 
 

Protein deposited = B + (2C x age) 
 

Next, individual weight data were fitted to power curves       
 

ln (weight) = A + (B x ln(age)) 
 

Then, for each individual 0-2 y children the ratio of these two equations estimated protein 
deposited per day per kg of body weight (Table 5.5). 
 
Children from age 4-18 y 
 

 Protein deposition needs of children (4-18 y) were reported by Ellis et al14 in a cross-sectional 
study. A single model was fitted to the entire data set for each sex: Data on protein (yearly cohort 
averages) were fitted into a single cubic curve for each sex,  
 

Males: Protein (kg) = 5.46 - (1.285 x age) + (0.166 x age2) – (0.00433 x age3), r2=0.992 
 

Females:  Protein (kg) =3.91 – (0.925 x age) + (0.139 x age2) – (0.00428 x age3), r2=0.993 
 

These curves were differentiated to give protein deposition rate estimates. 
 

Males:   Protein deposited (kg/year) = -1.285 + (0.332 x age) – (0.0130 x age2) 
 

Females:  Protein deposited (kg/year) = -0.925 + (0.279 x age) – (0.0128 x age2) 
 

The weight data were fitted to a cubic curve for each sex. 
 

Males:  Weight (kg) = 5.42 – (15.0 x age) + (1.89 x age2) – (0.0557 x age3), r2=0.991 
 

Females:  Weight (kg) = 2.53 – (4.47 x age) + (0.73 x age2) – (0.0198 x age3), r2=0.972 
 

73 
 



The ratio of these two functions (adjusted to give daily values), estimate protein deposition per 
kg.   

 

Since 2 different datasets for protein deposition at different ages were available, a quadratic 
equation was used to interpolate data between the two data sets for the missing ages between 2 and 4 
years4. The final growth and protein deposition values for each year are given in Table 5.5. These 
values for growth, particularly during the first year of life are slightly lower than previous estimates 
up to 3 months of age, and slightly higher thereafter.  
 

Variability of protein deposition 
 

The data on the variability of protein deposition is also an important consideration, as it is a part 
of the total variability of the requirement in a factorial model. In the younger age group of children 
(0-2 years), directly observed variability (CV) of the rate of protein deposition was available. It was 
a mean of 24% for the entire age range and was higher as the rate of growth slowed down.13 This 
variability was used in the factorial model for infants up to the age of 6 months. In the older children, 
directly observed data were not available for the variability of deposition. These were derived from 
longitudinal data that allowed for estimating the variability of velocity of growth, along with 
assumptions of fraction of weight as protein, as growth progressed. 

 

Table 5.5: Protein deposition in infants, toddlers and childrena 

 

Age Proteindeposition g/kg/d 
(Y) Females Males Both sexes SDb Group 
0.5 0.266 0.266 0.266 0.035 

Infants 
1.0 0.168 0.168 0.168 0.031 
1.5 0.108 0.108 0.108 0.029 
2.0 0.076 0.073 0.075 0.026 
3.0 0.044 0.034 0.039 0.022 Pre-school 

children 
4.0 0.026 0.013 0.020 0.019 
5.0 0.022 0.009 0.016 0.017 
6.0 0.038 0.032 0.035 0.016 
7.0 0.048 0.048 0.048 0.016 

School 
8.0 0.051 0.055 0.053 0.016 

children 
9.0 0.050 0.056 0.053 0.017 
10.0 0.047 0.054 0.051 0.017 
11.0 0.043 0.050 0.047 0.018 
12.0 0.037 0.045 0.041 0.018 
13.0 0.031 0.041 0.036 0.018 
14.0 0.025 0.036 0.031 0.017 

Adolescents 
15.0 0.018 0.032 0.025 0.015 

16.0 0.012 0.027 0.020 0.012 
17.0 0.005 0.023 0.014 0.008 
18.0 0.000 0.018 0.009 0.005 

 
a Derived from Butte et al 200013 and Ellis et al 200014 

b On average, the CV of protein deposition was 24% (till 2 y) from Butte et al 200013 and from longitudinal 
data on velocity of growth for older children (2-18 y)14. 

 

74 
 



Factorial estimates of protein requirements of 0-18y 
 

The estimated average requirement for years 0-18, is calculated, as the sum of maintenance 
requirement plus protein deposited. 

 

EAR (mg/kg/day) = Maintenance + (Deposition / Efficiency of utilization) 
 

Maintenance is calculated assuming that maintenance in young children is 0.58 g/kg/d which 
increase at 6 months to the adult value of 0.66 g/kg/d. In the case of infants below the age of 6 months, 
efficiency of utilization of protein for growth was assumed to be 66%, while beyond that age, it was 
58%. Further safe levels were calculated as the mean requirement plus 1.96 times the SD (with 1SD 
calculated as the root mean square of the SDs for maintenance and growth). The safe level of protein 
intake for infants up to the age of 6 months is given in Table 5.6. These values are lower than those 
provided by the 1985 FAO/WHO Consultation. Values for boys and girls are similar up to the age of 
10 years and are given in Table 5.7.  

 

Boys and girls have different growth patterns and their protein deposition rates will be different. 
Therefore, protein requirement for adolescents is given separately for boys and girls (Table 5.8) 
although the principles of calculation remain exactly the same as for children up to the age of 10 
years.  

 

Table 5.6: Safe level of protein intake (g/kg/d) for infants aged less than 6 months 
 

Age Maintenance Growth Average Safe leveld 1985 
(m) requirementa requirementb requirementc (+1.96 SD) Reporte 

1 0.58 0.83 1.41 1.77 2.25 

2 0.58 0.65 1.23 1.50 1.82 

3 0.58 0.55 1.13 1.36 1.47 

4 0.58 0.49 1.07 1.24 1.34 

6 0.58 0.40 0.98 1.14 1.30 
 

a calculated from the maintenance requirement (from N balance studies with milk/egg). 
b Protein deposition rates taken from Butte et al200013, adjusted for 66% efficiency of utilization (from N 

balance studies with milk/egg). 
c Sum of maintenance and protein deposition rate. 
d Mean + (1.96 x SD values for protein deposition during growth, adjusted for efficiency of utilization, and 

the maintenance). 
e Values from the 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU consultation3. 
 

These protein requirements of children and adolescents have been based on systematic studies 
on protein deposition based on total body potassium (TBK) and maintenance requirements, 
extrapolated from infant to adult13. The safe requirements are more systematically derived values than 
the earlier values, which were based on body weight increases and their protein component. Hence, 
these values also can be adopted for Indian infants, children and adolescents. Daily total protein intake 
can be derived from the proposed safe intake per kg per day and the normal body weights of healthy, 
well-nourished Indian infants, children and adolescents (refer chapter 3, Table 3.3). Safe intakes of 
protein by Indian children was calculated based on good quality protein as proposed by 
FAO/WHO/UNU 2007. The protein intake for infants up to 0.5 y are those proposed by 
FAO/WHO/UNU as they are based on breast milk.  

75 
 



Table 5.7: Safe level of protein intake for children above 6 months up to                                       
10 years (sexes combined) * 

 

g protein / kg body weight /d 
Age 
(y) Safe levelc 1985 

Maintenancea Growthb  
 Total 

(+1.96SD) Report3 

0.5 0.66 0.46 1.12 1.31 1.75 

1 0.66 0.29 0.95 1.14 1.57 

1.5 0.66 0.19 0.85 1.03 1.26 

2 0.66 0.13 0.79 0.97 1.17 

3 0.66 0.07 0.73 0.90 1.13 

4 0.66 0.03 0.69 0.86 1.09 

5 0.66 0.06 0.69 0.85 1.06 

6 0.66 0.04 0.72 0.89 1.02 

7 0.66 0.08 0.74 0.91 1.01 

8 0.66 0.09 0.75 0.92 1.01 

9 0.66 0.09 0.75 0.92 1.01 

10 0.66 0.09 0.75 0.91 0.99 
 
* For total daily protein requirement in each age band, values need to be multiplied by the normative attained 

weight in that age band. For example, the age band of 10 years represents the class interval from 9.1-10.0 
years. The weight of a boy in this age band is 28.0 kg (Chapter 3 in Table 3.3). Then, the total protein 
requirement will be = 0.91 x 28 = 25.5 g/day.  

a From N balance studies on children 
b Growth requirement is calculated based on protein deposition divided by 0.58 (efficiency of utilization)  
c SD for maintenance based on CV of 12%. SD for growth calculated from SD of protein deposition divided 

by 0.58 (efficiency of utilisation). 
 

5.2. Amino Acid Requirements 
 

5.2.1. Amino acid requirements for adults, non-pregnant and non-lactating women 
 

The nutritionally essential or indispensable amino acid (IAA) requirements of adult man 
recommended in the 1985 WHO/FAO/UNU Consultation3, as shown in Table 5.9, were quite low. 
Many food proteins that were limiting in one or more IAA could supply the recommended IAA, if 
adequate quantity of the food protein or a combination of food proteins was present in the diet. These 
earlier recommendations were based on N balance measurements, where several confounding issues, 
like a high energy intake (that could spare the requirement), were present.   

 

More recent investigations of human amino acid requirements are much more accurate, and are 
based on measurements of carbon balance, rather than N balance. This is because stable isotopic 
methods were used, which measured the irreversible oxidative loss of 13C carbon, and therefore of 
the amino acid from the body. These have shown that human IAA requirements are 2-3 times higher 
than what was recommended earlier4. These revised figures are shown in Table 5.9, along with earlier 
WHO/FAO/UNU 1985 figures for comparison. The WHO/FAO/UNU 2007 Consultation 
acknowledged that “the (experimental) methods involve a number of assumptions in their 
interpretation and there is, as yet, no complete consensus as to their relative merits, but that the most 
reliable approach involved measurements over an entire 24-hour period representative of a normal 

76 
 



day with 13C tracers which can be reliably interpreted in terms of calculation of oxidation rates after 
some adaptation to the intakes.”  

 
Table 5.8: Safe level of protein intake for adolescent boys and girls (11-18 y) 

 

g protein / kg body weight /d 
Age 
(y) Safe levelc

Maintenancea Growthb  
 Total 1985 report3 

(+1.96 SD) 
Boys 

11 0.66 0.09 0.75 0.91 0.99 

12 0.66 0.08 0.74 0.90 0.98 
13 0.66 0.07 0.73 0.90 1.00 
14 0.66 0.06 0.72 0.89 0.97 

15 0.66 0.06 0.72 0.88 0.96 
16 0.66 0.05 0.71 0.87 0.92 
17 0.66 0.04 0.70 0.86 0.90 
18 0.66 0.03 0.69 0.85 0.86 

Girls 

11 0.66 0.07 0.73 0.90 1.00 

12 0.66 0.06 0.72 0.89 0.98 
13 0.66 0.05 0.71 0.88 0.98 
14 0.66 0.04 0.70 0.87 0.94 
15 0.66 0.03 0.69 0.85 0.90 
16 0.66 0.02 0.68 0.84 0.87 
17 0.66 0.01 0.67 0.83 0.83 
18 0.66 0.00 0.66 0.82 0.80 

 

For total daily protein requirement based on attained body weight in each age band, see Table 5.5 
a From N balance studies 
b From Table 5.7 adjusted for efficiency of utilization of 58% from N balance studies on children  
c SD for maintenance based on CV of 12%. SD for growth calculated from SD of protein deposition divided 
by 0.58 (efficiency of utilization). 
 

The new values for the daily amino acid requirement of adults have therefore, primarily been 
estimated by using the 24-hour oxidation of 13C-labelled amino acids after some period of adaptation. 
This was the so-called direct amino acid balance (DAAB) method, requiring measurements with 
different 13C labelled IAA. However, there were technical difficulties in identifying the enrichment 
of the specific intracellular precursor pool from which labelled IAA oxidation was taking place. After 
many experiments that accurately identified the precursor pool for leucine (alpha-ketoisocaproic 
acid), it was concluded by consensus that the 24-hour 13C-labelled direct amino acid oxidation/ 
balance method could be used definitively only in the case of leucine15-16. When the same method 
was applied for lysine16 and threonine17, with assumptions, there were problems in arriving at a 
consensus over the merits of this direct carbon balance method.  

 

Another method of measuring amino acid requirement, which addressed several of the above 
methodological questions, including the precursor pool enrichment, was the indicator amino acid 
oxidation and balance (IAAO and IAAB) method17,18. This method also relied on stable isotopes to 
measure amino acid oxidation, but it differed from the carbon balance approach in that the oxidation 
of an amino acid other than the test amino acid was measured. This amino acid was called the 

77 
 



‘indicator amino acid’. In this case, it was measured by determining leucine balance, since the 
intracellular pool of leucine from which oxidation occurs (the precursor pool) was alpha-
ketoisocaproic acid, which readily equilibrated with the plasma pool, and was hence relatively easily 
measured.  

 

The leucine balance method was also validated earlier against the N balance method. The theory 
behind the method is that if one of the amino acids in the diet is below requirement (i.e. limiting), 
then all other indispensable amino acids cannot be fully utilized for protein synthesis and the excess 
is therefore oxidized. Experimentally, as the amount of the limiting (test) amino acid is increased, the 
other essential amino acids will be progressively better utilized and their oxidation rates will 
progressively fall to a lower limit till the point where the “requirement level” of the test amino acid 
is reached. The indicator amino acid balance would improve in the same manner. Intakes of the 
limiting (test) amino acid above this latter intake point, should no longer influence the oxidation of 
the indicator amino acid, which should remain low and constant, and the balance would remain at 
zero.  

 

It is critical in these experiments to maintain the intake of the indicator amino acid constant at 
all levels of intake of the test amino acid, so that the only influence on the oxidation of the indicator 
amino acid is the intake of the test amino acid. In these difficult experiments, a carbon balance of the 
indicator amino acid can be obtained, but only after an adequate adaptation to the test diet, as well as 
with a 24-hour measurement, as is the case for the directly measured carbon balances detailed 
above.The aim is to detect a “breakpoint” in the curve for oxidation or balance of the “indicator” 
amino acid against the intake of the test amino acid. Since this method utilizes the carbon balance of 
a well-characterized amino acid (such as leucine), it is, in effect, a replacement of the N balance 
method, and when used with the appropriate caveats of adequate adaptation and the measurement of 
24-hr balances, is now considered to be the gold standard for measurement for daily amino acid 
requirements.  

 

The accurate 24h IAAB method was first set up at St John’s Medical College, Bangalore, and 
was subsequently used to measure the requirements of IAA in Indians, who were both normal and 
undernourished, over short (1 week) and long (3 week) duration, with and without infections and 
parasites. These evidence (referred to in Table 5.9 below) provide the primary evidence for the 
WHO/FAO/UNU 2007 revisions of the indispensable amino acid requirements of man16-28. 

 

Owing to the complexity of the design, shorter indicator methods2 have been tested and, in 
general provide similar estimates of essential amino acid requirement. These shorter methods do away 
with adaptation to the test diet, as well as shorten the actual period of measurement of isotope kinetics 
to a few hours in the fed state. They are also simpler to perform, since they rely on the measurement 
of the breath enrichment of 13CO2 as a surrogate for actual amino acid oxidation. Therefore, the 
shorter methods are not actual balance measurements, and can be considered surrogate measurements. 
In some cases, they have provided estimates of amino acid requirement that are higher, but in others, 
give requirement figures that match the long-term indicator 24-hour balance method. On the other 
hand, the brevity and non-invasiveness of this method provides a way to measure the amino acid 
requirements of children2.  

 

For over 100 years, there has been a concern that the requirements of nutrients be set at the most 
desirable level. As Atwater29 wrote: “A man may live and maintain body equilibrium on either a 
higher or lower nitrogen level. One essential question is: what level is the most advantageous? The 
answer to this question must be sought in broader questions regarding bodily and mental efficiency, 
general health, strength and welfare”. The challenge of the future is to identify these functional indices 
of optimal health, particularly with different environmental challenges, which will guide future 
recommendations for IAA requirements in humans. 

78 
 



5.2.2. Amino acid requirements for infants, children and adolescents 
 

N balance studies have provided the only empirical data available for determination of 
indispensable amino acid requirements in children. However, due to problems in interpreting the data, 
they were not utilized; instead the factorial approach was used to calculate the indispensable amino 
acid requirement from 6 months through to 18 years4. The factorial approach based on the 
maintenance and growth components of the protein requirement was used to estimate the 
indispensable amino acid requirements4. 

 

Table 5.9: Indispensable Amino Acid Requirements: Adults 
 

FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 FAO/WHO/UNU 1985 
Amino acid mg/g mg/g 

mg/kg/d mg/kg/d 
protein protein 

Histidine 10 15 8-12 15 
Isoleucine19 20 30 10 15 
Leucine 39 59 14 21 
Lysine 30 45 12 18 
Methionine 10 16 - - 
Cysteine 4 6 - - 
Methionine + Cysteine 15 22 13 20 
Threonine 15 23 7 11 
Phenylalanine + 
Tyrosine 25 38 14 21 

Tryptophan 4 6 3.5 5.0 
Valine 26 39 10 15 
Total EAA 184 277 93.5 141 
Total Protein* 0.66 g/kg/d 0.60 g/kg/d 
Safe level of protein 

0.83 g/kg/d 0.75 g/kg/d 
(Mean+1.96 x SD)* 

 
*High quality proteins like egg, milk, meat etc. Numeral superscripts are references for Indian studies. 
 
Maintenance component: The amino acid requirements for maintenance was assumed to be similar 
to adults based on the observation that the average maintenance N requirement of children (110 
mg/kg/d) across a wide age range from 6 months to 18 
years was similar to the value of 105 mg/kg/d found for Table 5.10: Amino acid composition 

adult4. Thus, the adult maintenance protein requirement of human milk proteins 

of 0.66 g/kg/d times the adult maintenance amino acid 
mg amino acid/g 

pattern (amino acid requirement x maintenance protein Amino acid 
total milk protein 

requirement) was used to calculate the maintenance 
portion of the amino acid requirements4. Lysine 69 
 Threonine 44 

The scoring pattern based on amino acid Methionine 16 
requirement is different depending on the age group. In Leucine 96 
the case of the infant up to the age of 6 months, the Isoleucine 55 
amino acid content of breast milk is recognized as the 

Valine 55 
best estimate of amino acid requirements for this age 

Phenylalanine 42 
group. The average essential amino acid composition of 
mixed human milk proteins is given in Table 5.104. It Tryptophan 17 

must be recognized however that this pattern of amino Histidine 21 

acids may provide an intake that is in excess of the infant’s needs. 

79 
 



In the case of older children, no satisfactory experimental data were available to determine the 
amino acid requirement (except for lysine in India; see below), as in the case of adults. Therefore, a 
factorial approach was used. Since the maintenance and growth requirements for protein were known 
(as given above), the amino acid composition of the requirement pattern for maintenance (Table 5.11) 
was multiplied by the maintenance requirement for protein, for each essential amino acid. For protein 
deposition with growth, the amino acid composition of mixed tissue protein was multiplied by the 
protein deposited with growth (adjusted for efficiency of utilization of dietary protein), for each 
amino acid. Finally, sum of the amino acid requirement for maintenance and growth deposition was 
taken as the estimated average requirement of each amino acid. This factorial approach is shown in 
Table 5.11. Whole body, total amino acid requirements have also been determined in healthy school 
age children in India, by the IAAO method30. The measured lysine requirements in Indian school 
children was 33.5 mg/kg/day, which was similar to the WHO/FAO/UNU4 values and is a partial 
validation of the factorial method.  

 

Table 5.11: Factorial calculation for daily amino acid requirement in toddlers,                     
children, adolescents and adults4 

 

mg/g protein 
 

His Ile Leu Lys SAA AAA Thr Trp Val 
Tissue patterna 27 35 75 73 35 73 42 12 49 

Maintenance patternb 15 30 59 45 22 38 23 6 39 
Protein requirement 

Age Amino acid requirementd (mg/kg/d) 
(g/kg/d) 

 (y) 
Maintenance Growthc His Ile Leu Lys SAA AAA Thr Trp Val 

0.5 0.66 0.46 22 36 73 64 31 59 34 9.5 49 
1-2 0.66 0.20 15 27 54 45 22 40 23 6.4 36 
3-10 0.66 0.07 12 23 44 35 17 30 18 4.8 29 
11-14 0.66 0.07 12 22 44 35 17 30 18 4.8 29 
15-18 0.66 0.04 11 21 42 33 16 28 17 4.5 28 
>18 0.66 0.00 10 20 39 30 15 25 15 4 26 

 

His: Histidine; Ile: Isoleucine; Leu: Leucine; Lys: Lysine; SAA: Sulphur Amino Acids; AAA: Aromatic 
Amino Acids; Thr: Threonine; Trp: Tryptophan; Val: Valine 
a Amino acid composition (mg/g protein) of mixed tissue protein 
b Adult maintenance scoring pattern  
c Average values of protein deposition for growth from Table 5.5, adjusted for efficiency of utilization of 

58% 
d See text above. Sum of amino acids contained in maintenance pattern and in growth protein deposition 
 

5.3.  Protein quality 
 

An important factor in establishing human protein requirement on habitual diets is the quality 
of the habitual dietary proteins in terms of their nutritionally essential (indispensable) amino acid 
content. Efficiency of utilization of dietary protein depends upon its digestion and absorption of the 
released amino acids. Plant proteins, mainly in cereals, legumes and vegetables are of poorer quality 
than animal proteins, not only because of their lower digestibility but also because they are often 
limiting in one or more of the nutritionallyessential amino acids of human requirement. Cereal 
proteins are generally deficient in lysine and pulses or legume proteins contain low amounts of 
methionine. However, when both cereals and pulses (legumes) are present in the diet in proper 
proportions, proteins from these two sources supplement each other and make good each other’s 
deficiencies in lysine or methionine to a significant extent.  

 

80 
 



Two factors thus important are: the chemical composition of the protein in terms of the 
requirement pattern (amino acid score), and the digestibility. The product of these two factors: the 
AAS and the digestibility, provides an index for assessment of protein quality. These indices are 
Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS) and the Digestible Indispensable 
Amino Acid score (DIAAS)31. Each of these terms is discussed in detail below. 
 

5.3.1. Amino acid score (AAS) 
 

The chemical composition of the protein, in terms of its amino acids, is evaluated with reference 
to the requirement pattern for the individual. In earlier quality estimates of the biological value of 
protein, egg protein amino acid composition was to be used for comparison. However, presently a 
comparison with the amino acid composition of requirement pattern is suggested. A comparison of 
the amino acid content of the test protein with the reference value will provide the AAS, as depicted 
in the equation. The amino acid with the lowest score is called the limiting amino acid in that protein. 
The AAS is calculated as below and expressed either as a ratio to unity (recommended), or on a 
percentage scale4. 

 

mg of amino acid in 1 g of test protein
                           AAS =  

mg of amino acid in 1 g of requirement pattern

AAS of some food groups are presented in Table 5.12. In this, the new amino acid requirements 
(per kg/day) and the new median protein requirement (0.66 g/kg/day) are used to arrive at the score. 
The implication of the new essential amino acid requirements is: since lysine is the limiting amino 
acid in many cereals, the AAS, and hence the PDCAAS and DIAAS (see below for a complete 
description of this index) will be less than the optimal score of 1 or 100, or less than the requirement 
for a high-quality protein.   

 

Table 5.12: AAS based on FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 and 1985 Consultation 
 

Lysine Content Lysine score (%) Lysine score (%) 
Protein Source 

mg/g proteina (45 mg/g protein)b (16 mg/g protein)c 

Wheat 33 73 >100 
Rice 37 82 >100 
Sorghum 23 53 >100 
Millet* 32 71 >100 
Nuts*/ Seeds 34 77 >100 
Vegetables* 47 >100 >100 
Legumes* 62 >100 >100 

Animal Protein* 86 >100 >100 

aIFCT 201732, bFAO/WHO/UNU 20074, cFAO/WHO/UNU 19853 

*The following foods were used to represent these food groups; An average value for Bajra, Ragi and Jowar 
for millets, groundnuts for nuts, spinach for vegetables, red gram dal for legumes, milk for animal protein.  
  

 The amino acid scoring pattern (mg/g of protein requirement) for all the age groups is given in 
Table 5.13. This is in contrast to the 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU consultation3, where the pattern for pre-
school children was used generally for all ages. In general, the new FAO/WHO/UNU 20074 
requirements are lower than the earlier values that were used for the pre-school child. These values 
were recommended by ICMR 20105 expert group and have been retained by the present committee.  
 

 The foregoing discussion has spelt out safe intake of proteins per kg body weight per day as a 
sum of maintenance and growth requirement of infants, children and adolescents. Requirement values 

81 
 



for maintenance and growth have been derived more systematically by FAO/WHO/UNU 
Consultation in its 2007 Report, and those values differ from the figures given by the 1985 
Committee. However, since the diets generally consumed in India are predominantly based on plant 
proteins with a small contribution from milk or animal food, their biological value will be lower than 
that of the protein presumed by FAO/WHO/UNU 2007 Committee; there is a need to correct for the 
lower quality of protein from Indian habitual diet. The nutritive value of proteins from Indian diets 
had been derived on the basis of AAS and digestibility (based on reported average absorption of 
dietary proteins from several Indian studies) of 80%4, and the AAS has been computed from the 
newly recommended amino acid requirements for different ages and IAA content of proteins of a 
cereal-pulse-milk-vegetables based diet (Annexure 1). These computations are given in Table 5.14.  
 

Table 5.13: Amino acid scoring pattern for toddlers, children, adolescents                             
and adults (mg/g protein requirement) 

 

Age (y) His Ile Leu Lys SAA AAA Thr Trp Val 
0.5 20 32 66 57 28 52 31 8.5 43 
1-2 18 31 63 52 26 46 27 7.4 42 
3-10 16 31 61 48 24 41 25 6.6 40 
11-14 16 30 60 48 23 41 25 6.5 40 
15-18 16 30 60 47 23 40 24 6.3 40 
>18 15 30 59 45 22 38 23 6.0 39 

 

Values based on the amino acid requirement and the protein requirement for each age group. 
His: Histidine; Ile: Isoleucine; Leu: Leucine; Lys: Lysine; SAA: Sulphur Amino Acids; AAA: Aromatic 
Amino Acids; Thr: Threonine; Trp: Tryptophan; Val: Valine 
 

Table 5.14: AAS for requirement computation (mg/g protein requirement) 
 

Age (y) His Ile Leu Lys SAA AAA Thr Trp Val 
Requirement pattern (mg/g protein) 

3-10 16 31 61 48 24 41 25 7 40 
11-14 16 30 60 48 23 41 25 7 40 
15-18 16 30 60 47 23 40 24 6 40 
>18  15 30 59 45 22 38 23 6 39 

Amino acid composition of mixed diet (mg/g protein)* 
 27 40 79 46** 32 92 35 12 53 

AAS 
3-10 y 100+ 100+ 100+ 96 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 
11-14 y 100+ 100+ 100+ 96 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 
15-18 y 100+ 100+ 100+ 98 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 
>18 y  100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 100+ 

 

* Amino acid contents are calculated from balanced diet for moderately active men (Annexure 5.1). For the 
purpose of calculation, cereals and millets were presumed to be in the ratio 40:40:20 for rice: wheat: millet 
(Ragi/Bajra/Jowar). Pulse was presumed to be entirely red gram dhal. Green leafy vegetables were 
presumed to be represented by spinach alone, while ‘other vegetables’ were presumed to be represented 
by french beans. Potato was considered to be representative of the roots and tubers food group. Banana 
was selected as the representative of fruit. Source of nutritive value of foods is IFCT, 2017. 

** Presuming wheat to be whole wheat. With refined wheat flour, the lysine value (mg/g protein) reduces by 
about 6.5%. 
Note: Amino acid composition of mixed diet (mg/g protein)is slightly different from the previous report 
as the new food composition table values32 has been used.  

 

82 
 



Based on the data from Table 5.14, it is evident that on a cereal-legume-milk based diet, lysine 
is marginally limiting in all age groups except adults.  
 

5.3.2. Digestibility of protein 
 

The digestibility is the proportion of a food protein that is absorbed after digestion, determined 
by measuring the digestive losses, and is expressed as the proportion of ingested N or amino acids 
that is absorbed in the intestine following protein consumption. 

 

Digestibility (%) = (Ingested – digestive losses) / Ingested % 
 

The measurement of the digestive losses can be made in the faeces or at the level of the terminal 
ileum; the former method is traditionally and widely used to estimate protein digestibility. In fecal 
digestibility, the proportion of food protein which is absorbed, is computed from measurement of the 
N content of the food ingested and the N excreted in faeces, taking into account the extent to which 
faecal N is endogenous, which is measured as faecal N lost on a protein-free diet. The measurement 
is called true fecal digestibility when it is adjusted for the contribution of endogenous N or amino 
acids sources (such as enzymes, immunoglobulins, intestinal epithelial debris etc.), otherwise, it is 
termed apparent digestibility.  

 

The key difference between fecal and ileal digestibility is related to the colonic microbial N 
contribution, and therefore, confounding of the estimation of true digestibility. The end products of 
protein digestion (amino acid, di- and tri-peptides) that are unabsorbed in the small intestine are 
mainly metabolized by colonic bacteria with the production of ammonia, other bacterial metabolites 
and amino acids. Ammonia and many of the bacterial metabolites can be absorbed by the colon 
whereas amino acid absorption in the colon remains questionable. The protein digestibility values 
obtained by the fecal analysis method are thus overestimated when compared to the ileal analysis 
method. In addition, differences between fecal and ileal digestibility are particularly important for 
protein sources which are poorly digested in the upper intestine, increasing the quantity to be 
fermented in the colon. Furthermore, in the Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid Score 
(PDCAAS) approach, the same value of faecal protein digestibility is applied to each amino acid. It 
is known that different amino acids from a same dietary protein source have different digestion and 
absorption rates, and that each amino acid should be treated as an individual nutrient. A recent FAO 
expert consultation31 proposed that protein quality should be assessed by using ileal digestibility of 
each IAA in relation to its content in the protein under consideration and has led to a new digestibility 
index called the Digestible Indispensable Amino Acid Score (DIAAS). This has now been considered 
as a more accurate methodology for determining digestibility and for its application in protein quality 
assessment. In the present report both faecal and ileal digestibility values are provided for assessing 
protein quality, using PDCAAS and DIAAS. 
 

Methods to determine protein digestibility 
 

The classic procedure for determining fecal digestibility in-vivo has been the faecal index 
method, in which the N excreted in the faeces is subtracted from the amount ingested and the value 
expressed as a percentage of intake. To determine true digestibility, it is necessary to correct for the 
amount of faecal N excreted when the subject is consuming either a protein free diet, or a diet with 
just enough of a highly digestible protein to prevent excessive loss of body protein. Since true 
digestibility measurements consider the metabolic faecal N which is not of dietary origin, it is always 
higher than the apparent digestibility. Apparent protein digestibility values increase with increasing 
protein intakes, whereas true digestibility values are independent of protein intake4. The true fecal 
digestibility values estimated in humans are provided in Table 5.15. 

 

83 
 



A recently convened FAO expert working group report described approaches to different 
methods of estimating true ileal protein or IAA digestibility33. Briefly, the ileal digestibility measure 
in humans requires the direct collection of ileal digesta, which is performed either by using naso-ileal 
intubation methods or collection through ileostomy. These methods are invasive and not possible to 
deploy as routine methods. Stable isotope based methods have been proposed as non-invasive or 
minimally invasive alternatives, which include the IAAO and the dual isotope tracer approach2,34. 
The best method currently available to comprehensively measure IAA ileal digestibility is the dual 
tracer method, which has been developed and used to determine true IAA digestibility for specific 
foods in Indian adults and children35-38. Since this method measures and compares the appearance of 
labelled amino acids from an intrinsically labelled test and standard protein, it is not confounded by 
endogenous protein secretion, and is hence a measure of true ileal digestibility. The true ileal IAA 
digestibility values obtained by this method in South Indian adults and children are provided in Table 
5.16 and 5.17 below. 

 

Table 5.15: True fecal digestibility values for various protein sources in humans* 
 

True digestibility True digestibility 
Protein sources Protein sources 

(%) (%) 

American mixed diet 96 Oatmeal 86 

Beans 78 Oats, cereal 72 

Brazilian mixed diet 78 Peanut butter 95 

Chinese mixed diet 96 Peanuts 94 

Corn, cereal 70 Peas, mature 88 

Corn, whole 87 Rice, cereal 75 

Cottonseed 90 Rice, polished 88 

Egg 97 Soy flour 86 

Farina 99 Soy protein isolate 95 

Filipino mixed diet 88 Sunflower seed flour 90 

Indian rice + beans diet 78 Triticale 90 

Indian rice diet 77 Wheat flour, white 96 

Indian rice diet +milk 87 Wheat gluten 99 

Maize 85 Wheat, cereal 77 

Maize + beans 78 Wheat, refined 96 

Maize + beans +milk 84 Wheat, whole 86 

Meat, fish 94 

Milk, cheese 95  

Millet 79 
 

   *Source WHO/FAO/UNU, 20074 

 
Differences in protein digestibility from different foods may arise from inherent differences in 

the nature of food protein (protein configuration, amino acid bonding), from the presence of non-
protein constituents, anti-nutritional factors (dietary fibre, tannins and phytate) and processing 
conditions that alter the release of amino acids from proteins by enzymatic processes39. 
 

84 
 



5.3.3. Protein quality indexes 
 

Qualitative differences in food protein sources can be determined by many methods. In this 
section, some of the traditional methods have been described in brief, followed by discussion on the 
more recent methods of estimation using the fecal protein and ileal IAA digestibility to compute the 
PDCAAS and DIAAS. 

 

Table 5.16: True ileal mean indispensable amino acid digestibility of select                              
legume and animal protein sources in South Indian adults 

 
Whole De-

Chick Yellow Egg Whole Chicken 
Spirulin

Meatb ac

Peaa mung hulled 
IAA  pea 

(%) beana teb  
 Egg 

munga Whi  
  (%) 

(%) 
(%) (%) (%)b 

(%) (%) 

Methionine 71.8 56.1 52.2 64.3 79.8 85.9 92.7 85.9 

Phenylalanin
80.9 80.6 73.4 75.1 93.0 95.6 94.4 94.0 

e 

Threonine 72.5 66.8 42.5 54.5 88.7 96.2 93.7 87.7 

Lysine 60.0 62.1 63.0 63.4 88.8 88.9 95.5 81.1 

Leucine 79.5 79.0 67.5 76.3 87.9 87.6 89.1 87.5 

I-Leucine 81.4 79.5 75.8 82.9 83.5 85.4 88.8 83.5 

Valine 75.6 77.4 63.2 80.0 82.1 86.6 89.6 84.8 

Mean IAA 74.6 71.6 63.2 70.9 86.3 89.4 92.0 86.4 

aKashyap et al, 201938; bKashyap et al, 201836, cDevi et al, 201835 
 

Table 5.17: True ileal mean indispensable amino acid digestibility of select                                 
plant and animal protein source in South Indian children (1.5 – 2 years) * 

 

Rice Finger millet Mung bean Egg 
IAA 

(%) (%) (%) (%) 

Methionine 79.7 60.1 54.0 85.9 

Phenylalanine 83.9 69.4 77.2 89.6 

Threonine 73.4 67.2 61.6 90.1 

Lysine 78.3 74.5 64.8 93.6 

Leucine 78.7 67.2 68.0 86.3 

Iso-leucine 80.5 75.4 63.0 85.4 

Valine 75.2 65.3 68.0 81.2 

Mean IAA 78.5 68.4 65.2 87.4 

*Shivakumar et al, 201837 

 

85 
 



Traditional methods of protein quality assessment 
 

5.3.3.1 Protein efficiency ratio (PER) 
 

PER is one of the earliest and widely used approaches to assess the nutritional quality of proteins 
for humans by using a rat growth assay. This index determines the ability of a dietary protein to 
support growth in rapidly growing young rats and is dependent on the amount of protein incorporated 
in the test diet. The PER is expressed as the body weight gain in gram per gram of test protein 
consumed. In spite of its use, there have been major criticisms to the use of the method. The most 
common being its inability to account for the maintenance protein requirement and the errors 
associated with changes in the body composition of the growing rats. It is now known that PER tends 
to be overestimated for animal proteins and under estimated for vegetable proteins due to the higher 
growth rate of rats as compared to humans. Additionally, PER is a measure of total protein quality 
and does not indicate individual amino acid utilisation3. 

 

5.3.3.2 Biological Value (BV) 
 

Biological value has long been considered as the method of choice for protein quality 
assessment. It is defined as the “percentage of absorbed N retained in the body” with the test protein 
as the only source of N in the diet. These values are obtained by measuring the fecal and urinary N 
loss after test protein ingestion and correcting for the amounts excreted when a N-free diet is fed. It 
determines quality of a single protein and does not provide information on interaction of protein with 
other foods in the diet, thus limits its application in human protein requirement studies. In addition, 
the strict experimental protocol and protein-free feeding protocol is unsuitable for routine application 
in humans3. 
 
5.3.3.3 Net protein Utilisation (NPU) 
 

Similar to BV, NPU estimates N (test protein) retention, but in this case by determining the 
“percentage of the dietary protein (N) retained in the body”. It includes both the digestibility (defined 
as the percentage of the food N absorbed from the gut) and the BV of the test protein. It is directly 
related to dietary intake of protein unlike BV which is an estimate of absorbed N. Retention of N is 
measured by balance studies or direct carcass analysis. Although it is the most reliable method among 
the other traditional methods, the tedious experimental protocol like BV restricts its routine 
application in humans3. 
 

5.3.3.4 Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid Score  
 

In 1989, the joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Protein Quality Evaluation (FAO/WHO 
1990)40 suggested that protein quality could be assessed adequately by expressing the content of the 
first limiting essential amino acid of the test protein compared to the content of the same amino acid 
in a reference pattern of essential amino acids. This reference pattern was based on the essential amino 
acid requirements of the preschool-age child as published in 1985 (FAO/WHO/UNU 1985)3. 
Subsequently, this percentage is corrected for the apparent and true fecal digestibility of the test 
protein to derive PDCAAS. 
 

PDCAAS = Apparent or true fecal crude protein digestibility x Limiting AAS  
 

To calculate the PDCAAS, first the AAS for the limiting IAA of a food protein or mixed meal 
must be estimated (Table 5.18). For the mixed meal, a weighted average digestibility is used. The 
AAS of the IAA is then corrected for the apparent or true fecal crude protein digestibility value (Table 
5.15), estimated in humans or animal models, as per the data available for a particular food or a mixed 
diet. Where data is available, it is preferable to use the true ileal protein digestibility estimated in 

86 
 



humans. The PDCAAS index is then calculated as the protein digestibility corrected AAS based on 
the limiting AA requirement for the specified age group.  

 

Proteins with PDCAAS values exceeding 1 (i.e. 100%) are not considered to contribute 
additional benefit in humans and are truncated to 1. A PDCAAS score below 1 indicates that at least 
one amino acid is limiting and a score of 1 indicates that there is no limiting amino acid, in the food 
or mixed diet to be assessed. Thus, PDCAAS determines the effectiveness with which the absorbed 
dietary N or amino acids meets the IAA requirement at safe levels of protein intake41. However, the 
PDCAAS has been subject to constant criticism, of using a single crude protein or N digestibility 
value instead of a specific digestibility value of each IAA and using faecal instead of true ileal 
digestibility. 

Table 5.18: PDCAAS of a mixed diet (lysine had the lowest score)                                              
for different age groups 

 

AA with PDCAAS = AA Scoreb X true fecal 
Age Group AASa 

lowest score digestibilityb 

3-10 y Lysine 96 96 x 84/100 = 81 
11-14 y Lysine 96 96 x 84/100 = 81 
15-18 y Lysine 98 98 x 84/100 = 82 

> 18 y (adult) Lysine 102 102 x 84/100 = 86 
 

a Table 5.14, b WHO 20074 

b Average true fecal digestibility of a mixed Indian diet (based on rice, legume and milk), Table 5.15 
 

5.3.3.5 Digestible Indispensable Amino Acid Score  
 

To overcome the shortcomings of PDCAAS, FAO recommended replacing the PDCAAS with 
the new scoring system termed the digestible IAA score (DIAAS)31. In DIAAS, the constituent 
indispensible amino acids (IAA) of a protein source are corrected for its true ileal digestibility and 
the lowest scoring AA is termed as limiting and this defines it’s the DIAAS score. Therefore, there 
is a need to determine true ileal IAA digestibility of habitually consumed foods and mixed diets, 
preferably in humans; however, a porcine model has also been recommended as a possible alternative 
as its digestive physiology is very similar to humans42. 
 

DIAAS = True ileal digestibility of limiting amino acid x Limiting AAS 
 

In DIAAS calculation, the relative digestible content of the IAAs in the protein is compared to 
the requirement pattern of same IAAs of a particular age group. Hence, a reference ratio of the 
digestible amino acid content of each IAA in the test protein to the content of the corresponding 
amino acid in 1 g of the reference protein is calculated, and the lowest value is considered to be the 
DIAAS (expressed as percentage). A DIAAS score of 100 indicates that the protein source is of high 
quality and can satisfy the body protein requirement of a particular age. A DIAAS score below 100 
indicates that the protein source is limiting in at least one amino acid. A key difference between the 
DIAAS and the PDCAAS is that DIAAS requires the use of true ileal digestibility of each amino acid 
determined preferably in humans or growing pigs or growing rats in that order42. 

 

The DIAAS calculation of any food protein involves the following steps– 1) IAA content is 
expressed as mg/g of protein in the food, 2) individual IAA content (mg/g of protein) are multiplied 
by their respective true ileal digestibility values to obtain the true ileal digestible IAA content in the 
food, 3) A ratio of true ileal digestible IAA content (mg/g of protein) and reference IAA pattern (mg/g 
of protein) is calculated to obtain a digestible IAA reference ratio, 4) The ratio is  expressed as a 
percentage, and the lowest value is considered to be the DIAAS of that food.  

87 
 



The DIAAS of a mixed diet is calculated using the true ileal digestibility of IAA from each 
food. An example of estimating the DIAAS of a mixed meal is provided in Table 5.19. In this, the 
digestibility of lysine is taken as the key IAA digestibility (as lysine is the limiting AA in a typical 
Indian mixed meal), but the same method can be applied for all amino acids. The following steps are 
involved - 1) protein content (g/100g of mixed diet) of each food is calculated, 2) The IAA content 
of each food is expressed in mg/g of protein, 3) the individual IAA content (mg/g of protein) of each 
food is then multiplied by the respective true ileal IAA digestibility values to obtain the true ileal 
digestibile IAA content in mixture (mg/g of protein) 4) A ratio of total true ileal digestible IAA 
content (mg/g of digestible protein) and reference pattern of limiting amino acid (mg/g of protein) is 
calculated, to derive a digestible IAA reference ratio, 5) The ratio is  expressed as a percentage and 
lowest value is considered to be the DIAAS of that food.  

 

 

5.3.3.6 Complementing IAA with mixed diets 
 

In assessing the PDCAAS and DIAAS of the dietary protein intake, it is necessary to consider 
a diet simulating the habitual diet of any country, or a well-balanced diet to provide all nutrients at 
the recommended level. A typical Indian habitual diet, well-balanced, but predominantly based on 
cereals, deriving its proteins from other sources like pulses, vegetables and milk and milk products, 
is given in Annexure 5.1. This is a low cost well-balanced diet, designed by improving a diet for the 
poor by improving the content of pulses (legumes), vegetables, green leafy vegetables and milk as 
well as the fat content. Cereals may be derived from more than one source, viz., rice, wheat and 
millets. The protein digestibility on mixed vegetarian diets is usually about 84.2% calculated as an 
average of the true fecal digestibility of Indian rice diet + milk and Indian rice diet + beans4. The true 
fecal digestibility values for different foods and mixed diets are provided in Table 5.15, and the 
computation of PDCAAS for each age group is provided in Table 5.18. 

 

Proteins from different sources may be present in a diet and they may complement each other 
and a limiting amino acid in a mixed diet may be different from individual protein sources present in 
the diet. For example, cereal proteins may be limiting in lysine, but if a mixture of cereals and legumes 
or legumes and milk proteins are present, lysine, deficiency may be reduced considerably. The mixed 
proteins from cereals and legumes may complement each other and PDCAAS of proteins from a 
cereal-pulse based diet will be more than that of a cereal protein.  
 
5.4. Protein energy ratio 

Protein energy interrelationship 
 

Protein utilization and deposition are dependent on intake of adequate energy. Adequate non-
protein energy from carbohydrate and fat is essential for dietary amino acid to be utilized for protein 
synthesis and for amino acid related functions in the body. If adequate dietary energy is not available, 
dietary protein is inefficiently utilized. Similarly, an increase in the energy and protein intake (N 
intake) has been shown to be separately effective in improving the N balance. The slope of N balance 
with increase in N intake is steeper at a higher intake of energy than at a lower intake. This has been 
demonstrated both in children44 and adults in India45. On the basis of international data, the relation 
of N balance to N intake and energy intake is given by the following formula4: 
 

N Balance = 0.17 x N Intake + 1.006 x Energy Intake - 69.13 
 

The slope of this equation indicates that N balance improves by 1 mg/kg/day per extra 1 
kcal/kg/day. A study conducted in Indian preschool children provided a mixed diet (cereal, pulse and 
milk based) found that decreasing energy intake by 20% increased the protein requirement by 20%44. 
This study reported that at an energy intake of 80 kcal/kg, protein requirement was 1.64 g/kg, while 
at 100 kcal/kg energy intake, the protein requirement decreased to 1.33 g/kg44. Similar relationships 

88 
 



between energy intake and protein intake for N equilibrium were observed in adults engaged in heavy 
manual labour45 in India. The study reported a negative N balance in these adults with a reduction in 
energy intake by 20% from a habitual energy and protein intake45. Therefore, it is essential to consider 
the protein and energy requirements together on habitual Indian diets. Protein requirement of different 
age groups can be expressed as ratio of protein energy to total dietary energy requirement (PE ratio). 
This PE ratio will differ for different ages and also between individuals engaged in different activities 
(lifestyles). In Table 5.20, safe recommended intake of protein is expressed as the ratio of 
recommended energy intake. If the PE ratio of any diet is compared with PE ratio of the recommended 
intake, it will indicate whether the diet will satisfy the protein requirement, when adequate energy is 
consumed. It will also indicate the level of energy intake below which protein also becomes 
deficient46. 
 

The important issue to consider is the way the PE ratio changes with the energy intake. Since 
protein requirement is constant at different levels of activity, when the energy requirement changes, 
the PE ratio also changes, becoming higher with reduced energy requirement, as in sedentary people. 
In addition, the requirement of protein in the food will also depend on the activity levels.   

  

In children, the PE ratio is usually low, owing to the high energy needs. In the elderly, there has 
been some suggestion that the protein requirement should be increased. While there is no evidence 
that if there is an increased protein requirement, it is likely that in the elderly, a sedentary way of life 
may lead to a drop in their energy requirement. With a constant protein requirement, this drop in the 
energy requirement will lead to an increased PE ratio of the required diet. Therefore, while the use of 
PE ratios can be of great value, the issues involved are complicated; hence care is required in both 
calculating and using such ratios. 

 

Protein quality of a diet is important and will reduce the proportion of protein required in the 
diet to meet essential amino acid requirements. It is not recommended that high protein diets (with a 
PE ratio of greater than 15%) to be routinely advocated (see section 5.5). The use of commercial high 
protein supplements for the elderly, or for pregnant and lactating women, is not encouraged. There is 
also no evidence that protein intake alone can increase muscle protein deposition in the absence of 
exercise. With regard to the latter, it is also important to know that if an individual were to exercise, 
energy requirements would increase and actually decrease the requirement PE ratio. Finally, 
utilization of protein is dependent on adequate intake of energy and micronutrients. The 
recommended intake of protein has to be accompanied by a balanced diet that meets all the 
micronutrient requirements.  
 
5.5 Tolerable Upper Limit (TUL) 
 

The consumption of a wide range of dietary protein intakes in humans are known47, with intakes 
2 to 3 times more than the RDA and PE ratio of the diet nearing 34%4. With an increase in intakes 
there is a related increase in concentrations of nitrogenous substances, especially urea, both in the 
blood and urine, which form a part of the body’s regulatory process47. Nonetheless, a number of 
undesirable effects have been reported, especially at the very high intakes, but also at more modest 
levels in children. 

 

Groups of people with high protein intake, for example Eskimos, who consume only meat, 
maintain a protein intake below 50 percent (estimated as 44%) of energy by eating fat48. Additional 
evidence for a maximum limit for dietary protein can be derived from historical records and 
anthropological studies, and these provide evidence that very high protein intakes might be toxic49. 
Analysis from old literature noted that consumption of more than about 45% of the dietary energy as 
protein led to nausea and diarrhea within 3 days and to death in a few weeks, a condition known as 
“rabbit starvation”.

89 
 



Table 5.19: DIAAS calculation (using lysine only) for different age groups 
 

True ileal
Compositiona  IAA 

 True ileal 
digestibilityb Protein content in 

digestibility IAA 
mixture 

Food content in mixturec 

Weight Protein Lys Lys 

(g) (g/100g food) mg/g protein  (g) (mg) 

A B C D E = (AxB)/100 ExCxD 
 

Whole wheat 170 10.6 33.1 0.84 18.0 500.6 
 

Rice 170 7.9 37.0 0.94 13.5 469.5 
 

Bajra 29 11.0 31.9 0.82 3.1 81.7 
Ragi 29 7.2 28.3 0.82 2.0 47.4 
Jowar 29 10.0 23.1 0.80 2.8 52.5 
Red gram dal 60 21.7 61.6 0.57 13.0 457.2 
Milk 200 3.3 85.9 0.96 6.5 537.7 
Total 686    59.1 2146.4 

Amino acids: mg/g protein (total for each amino acid/ total protein content in the mixture)  

Reference pattern: mg/g Digestible IAA DIAAS for 
Age group 

protein reference ratiod mixturee (%) 

3 – 10 years 48  0.76 76 
11-14 years 48 0.76 76 
15 – 18 years 47 0.77 77 
>18 years 45 0.81 81 

 

aIFCT 201732, bCVB Feed tables 201643, cFor example, calculation is shown only for lysine, where possible all IAA should be included in the calculation.  
dDigestible IAA reference ratio= (Digestible IAA in 1 g of mixed diet/mg of the same IAA in 1 g of the requirement pattern), eDIAAS for mixed diet 
(lowest value of the “digestible IAA reference ratio” expressed as % for each reference pattern31;  
Note: In this case as this is a mixed diet if the calculated DIAAS exceeded 100%, it would be truncated to 100% 

90 
 



Table 5.20: Protein energy ratio (%) for different age groups 
 

Protein Energy PE Ratio 
Group requirement requirement of 

g/kg/da kcal/kg/d requirement 

Pre-school childrenb 1-5 years 0.95 79 4.8 
School childrenb 6-10 years 0.91 68 5.4 

Adolescentsb 11-17 y (Boys) 0.88 56 6.3 

11-17 y (Girls) 0.86 51 6.7 

Adults 
Men (Sedentary) 0.83 32 10.4 
Women (Sedentary) 0.83 30 11.1 
Men (Moderate active) 0.83 39 8.5 
Women (Moderate active) 0.83 37 9.0 

PE Ratio = Protein Energy ratio; these values refer to the requirement 
a Safe requirement of high-quality protein 
b Assuming moderately active children and adolescents 

 
 

Rabbit meat has a very low-fat content, so consumption of enough rabbit meat to satisfy 
energy requirements resulted in very high protein intake49. However, there have only been case 
reports, in one of the two Arctic explorers, reporting adverse effects (weakness, nausea, and 
diarrhea) on high levels of intake (45 % energy as protein) that resolved on reduction of protein 
intake50,51.  

 

The evidence on high protein intakes on various organ functions and clinical conditions 
are equivocal. There have been reports of high protein intakes being implicated in chronic 
diseases such as osteopenia and osteoporosis, renal stones, renal insufficiency, cancer, coronary 
artery disease, and obesity51-55. On the contrary, there are other studies reporting benefits of 
high protein on diabetes and bone health56,57. 

 

In early life, there is evidence relating a higher protein intake (≥15 % energy as protein) 
during infancy to elevated risk of obesity in adulthood and an early adiposity rebound, in 
normal growing children52. Animal protein sources, particularly dairy products were mostly 
responsible for this association with adiposity55. An Indian study, with nutritional intervention 
to improve growth, using a relatively lower protein intake (11-13 % of energy) has 
demonstrated an increased propensity for fat mass gain. In this study, it was observed that the 
weight gain component of severely undernourished children (6-60 months), comprised 
predominantly of fat mass (40%)58.  

  

High protein supplements during pregnancy (>34% of energy) has shown untoward 
effects on pregnancy outcome59. A high protein supplement (470 kcal and 40 g protein/day) 
administration to a group of pregnant women in New York was associated with a small, non-
significantly higher weight gain, and a higher, non-significant increase in neonatal death with 
no difference in foetal growth60. The TUL for pregnancy has been tentatively set to 30%. From 
the available literature, with contradicting results on the benefits or ill-effects of a high protein 
diet, it is difficult to make a recommendation on the TUL. Nevertheless, knowing that a wide 
range of protein intakes are consumed, it must be assumed that any untoward effects are subtle, 
long-term and unreported. It would however be prudent to limit the protein intake to less than 
40 %, 15 % and 34% of energy, for adults, children and pregnant women respectively.  
 

5.6.  Summary of recommended protein requirements for Indians 
 

 The final protein requirements for different ages is given in Table 5.21.  

91 
 



Table 5.21: Summary of recommended protein requirements for Indians 

Body weighta ICMR 2020 
Groups 

(kg) EARb (g/kg/d) RDAb (g/kg/d) EARb (g/d) RDAb (g/d) TULb,c (PE ratio) 

Sedentary <40% 
Adult Men* Moderate 65 0.66 0.83 42.9 54.0 <40% 

Heavy Work <40% 
Sedentary <40% 

Adult 
Moderate 55 0.66 0.83 36.3 45.7 <40% 

Women# 
Heavy Work <40% 

Pregnant 2nd Trimester    +7.6 +9.5 <30% 
Womend 3rd Trimester    +17.6 +22.0 <30% 
Lactating 0-6 months    +13.6 +16.9 <40% 
Womene 6-12 months    +10.6 +13.2 <40% 

Infantsf 0-6 months 5.8 1.16 1.40 6.7 8.1 <15% 
6-12 months 8.5 1.04 1.23 8.8 10.5 <15% 
1-3y 11.7 0.79 0.97 9.2 11.3 <15% 

Childreng 4-6y 18.3 0.70 0.87 12.8 15.9 <15% 
7-9y 25.3 0.75 0.92 19.0 23.3 <15% 

Boysh 10-12y 34.9 0.75 0.91 26.2 31.8 <15% 
Girlsh 10-12y 36.4 0.73 0.90 26.6 32.8 <15% 
Boysi 13-15y 50.5 0.72 0.89 36.4 44.9 <15% 
Girlsi 13-15y 49.6 0.70 0.87 34.7 43.2 <15% 
Boysj 16-18y 64.4 0.70 0.86 45.1 55.4 <15% 
Girlsj 16-18y 55.7 0.67 0.83 37.3 46.2 <15% 

a Body weights are taken from Chapter 3;WHO child growth standard (for 0-5 years)61, WHO growth reference (for 6-17 years)62 and NNMB 2016 urban data (for adults)63 

b EAR, Estimated Average Requirement; RDA, Recommended Dietary Allowance; TUL, Tolerable Upper Limit; PE Ratio, Protein: Energy Ratio  

cTUL for lactating women is not available but set at the value for non-pregnant non-lactating women. 
d Additional protein requirement for pregnant women with GWG of 10 Kg, at 2nd and 3rd trimester(Table 5.1).  For GWG of 12 Kg, see Table 5.2. 
e Additional protein requirement for lactating women during 0-6 and 6-12 months (Table 5.4)  
f Average protein requirements of 1-6 months and 0.5-1y (Table 5.6 and 5.7) were used to calculate EAR and RDA of 0-6 and 6-12 month infants respectively 
g Average protein requirements of 1.5-3y, 4-6y and 7-9y (Table 5.7) were used to calculate EAR and RDA of 1-3y, 4-6y and 7-9y children respectively 
h Average protein requirements of 10-12y (Table 5.7 & 5.8) were used to calculate EAR and RDA  
iAverage protein requirements of 13-15y (Table 5.8) were used to calculate EAR and RDA 
j Average protein requirements of 16-17y (Table 5.8) were used to calculate EAR and RDA 
* For people consuming cereal based diet with low quality protein, the protein requirements are 1 g/kg per day. For men it is 65g/day  
# For women it is 55g/day 

92 
 



References 

1. FAO. Protein Requirements. Report of the Committee on Calorie Requirements, FAO Nutritional 
Studies No.16, 1957. 

2. Elango R, Ball RO, Pencharz PB. Recent advances in determining protein and amino acid 
requirements in humans. British Journal of Nutrition. 2012 Aug; 108(S2):S22-30. 

3. Joint FAO/WHO/UNU, Energy and Protein Requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU 
Expert Consultants, WHO Technical Report Series 724, 1985. 

4. FAO/WHO/UNU, Expert Consultation on Protein and Amino Acid Requirements in Human 
Nutrition. WHO Technical Report Series No.935, 2007. 

5. Indian Council of Medical Research: Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary 
Allowances for Indians. A Report of the Expert Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research, 
ICMR, New Delhi, 2010. 

6. Rand WM, Pellett PL, Young VR. Meta-analysis of nitrogen balance studies for estimating protein 
requirements in healthy adults. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2003 Jan 1; 77(1):109-
27. 

7. Indian Council of Medical Research: Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary 
Allowances for Indians. A Report of the Expert Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research, 
ICMR, New Delhi, 1989. 

8. Kuriyan R, Naqvi S, Bhat KG, Thomas T, Thomas A, George S, Nagarajarao SC, Sachdev HS, 
Preston T, Kurpad AV. Estimation of protein requirements in Indian pregnant women using a 
whole-body potassium counter. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2019 Apr 1; 
109(4):1064-70. 

9. Naqvi S, Bhat KG, Preston T, Devi S, Joseph J, Sachdev HS, Kurpad AV, Kuriyan R. The 
development of a whole-body potassium counter for the measurement of body cell mass in adult 
humans. Asia Pacific journal of clinical nutrition. 2018 Nov; 27(6):1190. 

10. Butte NF, Ellis KJ, Wong WW, Hopkinson JM, Smith EB. Composition of gestational weight gain 
impacts maternal fat retention and infant birth weight. American journal of obstetrics and 
gynecology. 2003 Nov 1; 189(5):1423-32. 

11. National Institute of Nutrition. Diet Surveys. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB), 
National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 1979. 

12. Rao BN, Pasricha S, Gopalan C. Nitrogen balance studies in poor Indian women during lactation. 
Indian Journal of Medical Research. 1958; 46:325-31. 

13. Butte NF, Hopkinson JM, Wong WW, Smith EO, Ellis KJ. Body composition during the first 2 
years of life: an updated reference. Pediatric research. 2000 May; 47(5):578-85. 

14. Ellis KJ, Shypailo RJ, Abrams SA, Wong WW. The Reference Child and Adolescent Models of 
Body Composition: A Contemporary Comparison a. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 
2000 May; 904(1):374-82. 

15. Kurpad AV, Young VR. Human indispensable amino acid requirements: new paradigms of 
measurement and the implication for protein quality. Indian journal of physiology and pharmacology. 
1999 Jan 1; 43(1):5-24. 

16. Kurpad AV, El-Khoury AE, Beaumier L, Srivatsa A, Kuriyan R, Raj T, Borgonha S, Ajami AM, 
Young VR. An initial assessment, using 24-h [13C] leucine kinetics, of the lysine requirement of 
healthy adult Indian subjects. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1998 Jan 1; 67(1):58-66. 

17. Kurpad AV, Raj T, Regan MM, Vasudevan J, Caszo B, Nazareth D, Gnanou J, Young VR. 
Threonine requirements of healthy Indian men, measured by a 24-h indicator amino acid oxidation 
and balance technique. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2002 Oct 1; 76(4):789-97. 

93 
 



18. Kurpad AV, Raj T, El-Khoury A, Beaumier L, Kuriyan R, Srivatsa A, Borgonha S, Selvaraj A, 
Regan MM, Young VR. Lysine requirements of healthy adult Indian subjects, measured by an 
indicator amino acid balance technique. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2001 May 1; 
73(5):900-7. 

19. Kurpad AV, Regan MM, Varalakshmi S, Gnanou J, Lingappa A, Young VR. Effect of cystine on 
the methionine requirement of healthy Indian men determined by using the 24-h indicator amino 
acid balance approach. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2004 Dec 1; 80(6):1526-35. 

20. Kurpad AV, Regan MM, Raj T, Gnanou JV. Branched-chain amino acid requirements in healthy 
adult human subjects. The Journal of nutrition. 2006 Jan 1; 136(1):256S-63S. 

21. Kurpad AV, Raj T, El-Khoury A, Kuriyan R, Maruthy K, Borgonha S, Chandukudlu D, Regan 
MM, Young VR. Daily requirement for and splanchnic uptake of leucine in healthy adult Indians. 
The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2001 Dec 1; 74(6):747-55. 

22. Kurpad AV, Regan MM, Raj T, Varalakshmi S, Gnanou J, Thankachan P, Young VR. Leucine 
requirement and splanchnic uptake of leucine in chronically undernourished adult Indian subjects. 
The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2003 Apr 1; 77(4):861-7. 

23. Raj T, Dileep U, Vaz M, Fuller MF, Kurpad AV. Intestinal microbial contribution to metabolic 
leucine input in adult men. The Journal of nutrition. 2008 Nov 1; 138(11):2217-21. 

24. Kurpad AV, Regan MM, Raj T, El-Khoury A, Kuriyan R, Vaz M, Chandakudlu D, Venkataswamy 
VG, Borgonha S, Young VR. Lysine requirements of healthy adult Indian subjects receiving long-
term feeding, measured with a 24-h indicator amino acid oxidation and balance technique. The 
American journal of clinical nutrition. 2002 Aug 1; 76(2):404-12. 

25. Kurpad AV, Regan MM, Raj T, Vasudevan J, Kuriyan R, Gnanou J, Young VR. Lysine 
requirements of chronically undernourished adult Indian men, measured by a 24-h indicator amino 
acid oxidation and balance technique. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2003 Jan 1; 
77(1):101-8.   

26. Kurpad AV, Regan MM, Nazareth D, Nagaraj S, Gnanou J, Young VR. Intestinal parasites increase 
the dietary lysine requirement in chronically undernourished Indian men. The American journal of 
clinical nutrition. 2003 Dec 1; 78(6):1145-51. 

27. Kurpad AV, Regan MM, Raj TD, Rao VN, Gnanou J, Young VR. The daily phenylalanine requirement 
of healthy Indian adults. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2006 Jun 1; 83(6):1331-6. 

28. Kurpad AV, Regan MM, Raj TD, Gnanou JV, Rao VN, Young VR. The daily valine requirement 
of healthy adult Indians determined by the 24-h indicator amino acid balance approach–. The 
American journal of clinical nutrition. 2005 Aug 1; 82(2):373-9. 

29. Reeds PJ, Hutchens TW. Protein requirements: from nitrogen balance to functional impact. The 
Journal of nutrition. 1994 Sep 1; 124(suppl_9):1754S-64S. 

30. Pillai RR, Elango R, Muthayya S, Ball RO, Kurpad AV, Pencharz PB. Lysine requirement of 
healthy, school-aged Indian children determined by the indicator amino acid oxidation technique. 
The Journal of nutrition. 2009; 140(1):54-9. 

31. FAO. Dietary protein quality evaluation in human nutrition. Report ofan FAO Expert Consultation. 
Food and nutrition paper no 92. Rome: FAO, 2013. 

32. Longvah T, An̲antan̲ I, Bhaskarachary K, Venkaiah K, Longvah T. Indian food composition tables. 
Hyderabad: National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research; 2017.  

33. FAO. Research Approaches and Methods for Evaluating the Protein Quality of Human Foods 
Proposed by an FAO Expert Working Group. Rome: FAO, 2014. 

34. Engelen MP, Com G, Anderson PJ, Deutz NE. New stable isotope method to measure protein 
digestibility and response to pancreatic enzyme intake in cystic fibrosis. Clinical nutrition. 2014 
Dec 1; 33(6):1024-32. 

94 
 



35. Devi S, Varkey A, Sheshshayee MS, Preston T, Kurpad AV. Measurement of protein digestibility 
in humans by a dual-tracer method. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2018 Jun 1; 
107(6):984-91. 

36. Kashyap S, Shivakumar N, Varkey A, Duraisamy R, Thomas T, Preston T, Devi S, Kurpad AV. 
Ileal digestibility of intrinsically labeled hen's egg and meat protein determined with the dual stable 
isotope tracer method in Indian adults. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2018 Nov 1; 
108(5):980-7. 

37. Shivakumar N, Kashyap S, Kishore S, Thomas T, Varkey A, Devi S, Preston T, Jahoor F, 
Sheshshayee MS, Kurpad AV. Protein-quality evaluation of complementary foods in Indian 
children. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2019 May 1; 109(5):1319-27. 

38. Kashyap S, Varkey A, Shivakumar N, Devi S, Reddy B H R, Thomas T, Preston T, Sreeman S, 
Kurpad AV. True ileal digestibility of legumes determined by dual-isotope tracer method in Indian 
adults. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2019 Oct 1; 110(4):873-82. 

39. Jansman AJ, Longstaff M. Nutritional effects of tannins and vicine/convicine in legume seeds. 
1993. InProceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Antinutritional Factors (ANFs) in 
Legume Seeds. Recent Advances of Research in Antinutritional Factors in Legume Seeds (eds. 
AFB Van der Poel, J. Huisman, HS Saini). EAAP Publication, Wageningen, The Netherlands (pp. 
301-316). 

40. Joint FA, Consultation WE. Protein Quality Evaluation FAO Food and Nutrition Paper 1990;51. 

41. Schaafsma G. The protein digestibility–corrected amino acid score. The Journal of nutrition. 2000; 
130(7):1865S-7S. 

42. Guilloteau P, Zabielski R, Hammon HM, Metges CC. Nutritional programming of gastrointestinal 
tract development. Is the pig a good model for man? Nutrition research reviews. 2010 Jun; 23(1):4-
22. 

43. CVB Feed Tables. Chemical compositions and nutritional values of feed ingredients. Product Board 
Animal Feed, CVB, The Hague, 2016. 

44. Iyengar AK, Rao BN, Reddy V. Effect of varying protein and energy intakes on nitrogen balance 
in Indian preschool children. British Journal of Nutrition. 1979 Nov; 42(3):417-23.  

45. Iyengar A, Rao BN. Effect of varying energy and protein intake on nitrogen balance in adults 
engaged in heavy manual labour. British Journal of Nutrition. 1979 Jan; 41(1):19-25. 

46. Millward DJ. Optimal intakes of protein in the human diet. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 
1999 May; 58(2):403-13. 

47. Wu G. Dietary protein intake and human health. Food & function. 2016; 7(3):1251-65. 

48. Krogh A, Krogh M. A study of the diet and metabolism of Eskimos undertaken in 1908 on an 
expedition to Greenland. 1915. 

49. Speth JD, Spielmann KA. Energy source, protein metabolism, and hunter gatherer subsistence 
strategies. Journal of Anthropology and Archaeology, 1983, 2:1–31. 

50. McClellan WS, Du Bois EF. Clinical calorimetry XLV. Prolonged meat diets with a study of kidney 
function and ketosis. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 1931, 87:651–668. 

51. McClellan WS, Rupp VR, Toscani V. Clinicalcalorimetry XLVI. Prolonged meat diets with a study 
of the metabolism of nitrogen, calcium and phosphorus. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 1930, 
87:669–680. 

52. Koletzko B, Demmelmair H, Grote V, Prell C and Weber M. High protein intake in young children 
and increased weight gain and obesity risk. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 
2016;103(2):303-304. 

95 
 



53. Pimpin L, Jebb S, Johnson L, Wardle J. and Ambrosini GL. Dietary protein intake is associated 
with body mass index and weight up to 5 y of age in a prospective cohort of twins. The American 
journal of clinical nutrition. 2015;103(2): 389-397. 

54. Rolland-Cachera MF, Akrout M. and Péneau S. Nutrient intakes in early life and risk of obesity. 
International journal of environmental research and public health. 2016; 13(6):564. 

55. Günther AL, Remer T, Kroke A. and Buyken AE. Early protein intake and later obesity risk: which 
protein sources at which time points throughout infancy and childhood are important for body mass 
index and body fat percentage at 7 y of age? The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2007; 
86(6):1765-1772. 

56. Rizzoli R, Biver E, Bonjour JP, Coxam V, Goltzman D, Kanis JA, Lappe J, Rejnmark L, Sahni S, 
Weaver C, Weiler H. Benefits and safety of dietary protein for bone health-an expert consensus 
paper endorsed by the European Society for Clinical and Economical Aspects of Osteopororosis, 
Osteoarthritis, and Musculoskeletal Diseases and by the International Osteoporosis Foundation. 
Osteoporosis international. 2018 May 8:1-6. 

57. Hamdy O, Horton ES. Protein content in diabetes nutrition plan. Current diabetes reports. 2011 Apr 
1; 11(2):111-9. 

58. Radhakrishna KV, Kulkarni B, Balakrishna N, Rajkumar H, Omkar C, Shatrugna V. Composition 
of weight gain during nutrition rehabilitation of severely under nourished children in a hospital 
based study from India. Asia Pacific journal of clinical nutrition. 2010 Mar; 19(1):8. 

59. Merialdi M, Carroli G, Villar J, Abalos E, Gulmezoglu AM, Kulier R, de Onis M. Nutritional 
interventions during pregnancy for the prevention or treatment of impaired fetal growth: an 
overview of randomized controlled trials. The Journal of nutrition. 2003 May 1; 133(5):1626S-31S. 

60. Rush D, Stein Z, Susser M. A randomized controlled trial of prenatal nutritional supplementation 
in New York City. Pediatrics. 1980 Apr 1; 65(4):683-97. 

61. WHO Multicentre Growth Reference Study Group. WHO Child Growth Standards based on 
length/height, weight and age. Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway: 1992). Supplement. 2006 Apr; 
450:76.  

62. WHO. Development of a WHO growth reference for school-aged children and adolescents. Bulletin 
of World Health Organization. 2007; 85:660-7. 

63.  National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB). Diet and nutritional status of urban population in 
India and prevalence of obesity, hypertension, diabetes and hyperlipidemia in urban men and 
women. National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research, NNMB Technical 
Report No. 27. Hyderabad, India, 2016. 

 

 

 

  

96 
 



Annexure 5.1 
 

Low cost Indian vegetarian diet for an adult man doing moderate activity 
 

Digestible 
Food group Amount Protein Nutrients (Based on present 

composition a (g/d) content b amount) 
(g/d) 

Cereals & Millets 425 32 Protein b (g) 57 

Pulses (legumes) 60 10 Total fat c 48 
Green leafy vegetables 

150 Energy (Kcal) 2452 
(GLVs) 
Other vegetables 100 9 Calcium (mg) 674 

Roots & tubers 100 Iron (mg) 21 

Fruits 150 Vitamin A (µg) d 965 

Milk and milk products 200 6 Riboflavin (mg) 1 

Fats & oils 30  Thiamine (mg) 2 

Sugar & Jaggery 28  Vitamin C (mg) 86 

PE ratio (%) 9  Niacin (mg) 13 

 
a Cereals and millets are presumed to be in the ratio 40:40:20 for rice: wheat: millets (Ragi/Bajra/Jowar). 
For calculation purpose, nutritive values of three millets are averaged. Spinach, french beans, potato 
and banana represents green leafy vegetables, other vegetables, roots and tubers and fruits respectively. 
Source of nutritive values of foods: IFCT, 2017.   
b Represents digestible protein content of the diet. Protein contents of food groups (except GLVs, other 
roots and tubers, fruits) are corrected for true faecal digestibility values (Table 5.16).  
c Represents total dietary fat  
d Vitamin A calculation: (β carotene content/8) + (Sum of other carotenoids/16) 
  

Additional note:  
 

 This vegetarian diet with a PE ratio of 9% would meet protein and energy requirements 
of a moderately active man. PDCAAS value of this diet is 85.6%. Milk intake could be 
substituted by intake of milk products or curd. This diet will cost around Rs. 20 per day 
and compares well with the 2019 per capita daily food expenditure. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

97 
 



Annexure 5.2 
 

Low cost Indian vegetarian high protein diet for an adult woman                                      
during 2nd and 3rd trimester of pregnancy (10 kg GWG) 

 

ible 
Food group 2nd Digest

 trimester 3rd trimester Protein 
protein 

composition a Amount (g/d) Amount (g/d) content b 
content b (g/d) 

Cereals & Millets 325 24 260 20 
Pulses (legumes) 65 11 80 14 
Green leafy 

250 250 
vegetables (GLVs) 
Other vegetables 100 9 100 9 
Roots & tubers 50 30 
Fruits 50 50 
Milk and milk 

300 9 750 23 
products 
Fats & oils 30  22  
Sugar & Jaggery 20  5  
Energy (kcal)          2019 2031  
Protein (g) b             54 65  
PE Ratio (%)             11 13  

 

a Cereals and millets are presumed to be in the ratio 40:40:20 for rice: wheat: millets (Ragi/Bajra/Jowar). 
For calculation purpose, nutritive values for all three millets are averaged. Spinach, french beans, potato 
and guava represents green leafy vegetables, other vegetables, roots and tubers and fruits respectively. 
Source of nutritive values of foods: IFCT, 2017.   
b Represents digestible protein content of the diet. Protein contents of each food group (except for GLVs, 
roots and tubers, fruits) are corrected for true faecal digestibility values (Table 5.16).  
 

Additional Notes:  
 

 The PDCAAS value of the above mixed diets are ~1.0, due to the additional provision of 
legume and milk. These vegetarian diets with a P:E ratio of 11% and 13%, for GWG of 10 
kg and 11% and 14% for GWG of 12 kg, will provide 350 kcal additional energy as 
compared to a standard diet for a sedentary non-pregnant and non-lactating woman.  

 As shown in the above table, for a 10 kg GWG, milk and legume amounts are increased as 
compared to the low-cost diet for moderately active man to meet additional protein 
requirement of 9 g and 22 g in 2nd and 3rd trimester respectively. 

 For a 12 kg GWG, additional 60 ml and 125 ml of milk to be provided to suffice extra 
protein requirement of 2 g and 4.3 g for 2nd and 3rd trimester respectively, when compared 
to 10 kg GWG.  

 Milk intake could be substituted by intake of milk products or curd. Each 100 ml milk 
intake can be substituted by 15 g legume intake. 

 Change in the pulse: cereal ratio from 1:7 in the standard diet (annexure-5.1), to about 1:5 
and 1:3 in the 2nd and 3rd trimester respectively. In addition, milk intake increased 1.5 to 4-
fold as compared to the standard diet (Annexure-5.1) to meet additional protein 
requirement. 

 

In a sedentary lifestyle with a solely vegetarian diet, it is difficult to reach a PE ratio of 
13%, unless milk intake (particularly toned milk) is substantial (about – ~ 700 ml/day), pulse: 
cereal intake ratio is about 1:3, root, tubers and visible fat are reduced. Inclusion of non-
vegetarian foods would help to meet the requirement for high quality protein. 

98 
 



6. FATS AND OILS 
 
 
6.1 Dietary fat:  Chemistry and functions  
 

Dietary fat (lipids) provides energy and essential fatty acids, serves as a vehicle for fat-soluble 
vitamins and facilitates their absorption.  Since fat provides high energy value (9 kcal or 37.7 kJ/g) 
as compared to carbohydrates or proteins (4 kcal or 16.7 kJ/ g), fat content of a diet contributes 
significantly to its caloric density. Fat enhances texture, taste and flavour of food, reduces its gastric 
emptying time and thereby affects satiety. Dietary fats have also been at the receiving end of 
tremendously bad press since the 1980s, mainly due to their putative deleterious role in 
cardiovascular diseases. However, research in the last decade have thrown up serious doubts about 
the strength of the ‘diet-heart hypothesis’ leading to the modification of dietary fat 
recommendations in the Western world. 

 

Dietary fat consists of heterogeneous mixtures of triacylglycerols (triglycerides) and small 
proportions of phospholipids, glycolipids, monoacylglycerols, diacylglycerols and unsaponifiable 
fraction composed of fat-soluble chemicals collectively designated as non-glyceride components.  
Fatty acids, the building blocks of various lipids, are classified into 3 groups: saturated fatty acids 
(SFAs), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). Most of 
the SFAs consisting of straight, even-numbered chains of 4-24 carbon atoms are classified as short 
(C<10:0), medium (C12:0 and C14:0) or long (C16:0-C24:0) chain fatty acids. The double bonds in 
MUFAs and PUFAs can be either cis or trans relative to the plane of acyl chain while the 
nutritionally significant MUFAs and PUFAs have double bonds in cis configuration. Unsaturated 
fatty acids (MUFAs and PUFAs) containing one or more double bonds in trans configuration are 
called trans fatty acids (TFAs). PUFAs are grouped into two series (n-6 or n-3) depending on 
whether the double bond closest to the methyl end is located at C6 or C3 position.  Humans can 
synthesize SFAs and MUFAs besides obtaining them from the diet, while they cannot synthesize 
the parent PUFAs, namely, linoleic acid (LA, C18:2n-6) and alpha-linolenic acid (ALA, C18:3n-3).  
LA and ALA are dietary essential fatty acids, and are metabolized by consecutive chain elongase 
and desaturase enzymes to long chain (LC) n-6 PUFAs {arachidonic acid (AA, C20:4n-6) is the 
predominant LC n-6 PUFA} and LC n-3 PUFAs {eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA, C20:5n-3)  
docosapentaenoic acid (DPA, C22:5n-3) and  docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, C22:6n-3)} 
respectively1. These are incorporated into the membrane lipids1. The current human diets generally 
furnish high LA levels and low ALA levels. Also, the conversion of ALA to LCn-3 PUFAs is slow 
and variable due to competitive interactions among LA, ALA and the various intermediates formed 
during their metabolism to LCPUFAs1. In addition, several other nutritional and hormonal factors 
can influence the metabolism of LA and ALA to their respective LC PUFAs. 

 
Functions of fatty acids    
 

In the body, fatty acids used for generation of cellular energy and biosynthesis of membrane 
lipids and lipid mediators1,2, are essential for development of central nervous system3, modulate 
lipoprotein metabolism and risk for diet-related non-communicable diseases (DR-NCD), namely, 
coronary heart disease (CHD), diabetes and cancers4-8. 

 
a) Modulation of membrane structure and functions 
 

As the integral components of cell membranes, fatty acids affect membrane fluidity and lipid 
protein interactions which alter activity of membrane-related transport systems, ion channels, 
membrane bound enzymes,  cellular receptors for hormones and neurotransmitters. AA and EPA of 
membrane phospholipids also give rise to an array of potent bioactive eicosanoids (thromboxanes, 

99 
 



prostacyclins and leukotrienes). Eicosanoids derived from AA have strong pro-inflammatory, pro-
aggregatory and vaso-constricting effects as compared to the opposing or weak effects 
of   eicosanoids   derived from EPA1,2. Recent studies have identified that PUFAs of n-6 and n-3 
series and their metabolic products regulate production of lipid cellular mediators namely, lipoxins 
(from AA), E series resolvins (from EPA), and D-series resolvins and neuro-protectins D1 (from 
DHA). Lipoxins and resolvins (from both EPA and DHA) have potent anti-inflammatory effects 
and neuro-protectin D1 has potent anti-inflammatory and neuro-protective effects9. Since LA, ALA, 
and their respective LC PUFAs have distinct biological effects, their absolute levels and their ratio 
(n-6: n-3) modulate physiological functions.  Although a dietary ratio in the range of 5:1 to 10:1 has 
been recommended10, emphasis should be on increasing the absolute levels of ALA and LCn-3 
PUFAs11.   
 
b) Role of AA and DHA in foetal and infant early growth and development  
 

During the foetal and early infant development, there is a rapid accretion of AA and DHA in 
infant brain, DHA in retina and AA in the whole body for meeting the demands of rapidly growing 
tissues/organs. Small amounts of DHA are also present in cell membranes throughout the body.  
AA and DHA have different and specific roles in neural and behavioural functions. DHA is crucial 
for the function of rhodopsin for vision and postsynaptic receptors for neurotransmission1-3. The 
foetus depends completely on the maternal source of LA, ALA, AA and DHA (maternal 
tissues/stores and dietary intake) and infant obtains these PUFAs through breast milk12,13. Human 
breast milk is unique in that it provides AA and DHA in addition to other fatty acids. DHA (as 
provided by human milk) is considered conditionally essential during the early human development.  
This is because of the high variability in the formation of DHA from ALA and because of its crucial 
role in normal retinal and brain development in the human. Studies have shown a close association 
between higher levels of maternal fish consumption during pregnancy and beneficial effects on 
maternal health as well as foetal and infant development.  
 
c) Role of dietary fatty acids in preventing CHD and other diet-related non-communicable 

diseases (DR-NCD) 
 

A strong and consistent association is documented between dietary fats and DR-NCD 
(particularly CHD), from metabolic studies, clinical trials and epidemiological studies4-8,14-16. 
Elevated serum levels of total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and total 
triglycerides; low serum levels of high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and increased ratios of 
total cholesterol: HDL cholesterol are associated with increase in CHD risk and CHD events. 
Dyslipidemia associated with metabolic syndrome (risk factor for type 2 diabetes) elicits high 
serum levels of triglycerides (very low density lipoproteins, VLDL and small dense lipoprotein, 
sdLDL) in addition to the above cited lipid abnormalities.  

 

Dietary fatty acids modify the concentrations of plasma triglycerides and lipoprotein 
cholesterol fractions which affect CHD risk significantly. Lauric (C12:0), myristic (C14:0) and 
palmitic (C16:0) acids increase serum LDL and total cholesterol as well as the risk of CHD and 
CHD events. TFAs are similar to SFAs in increasing LDL cholesterol but, in addition, they lower 
the protective effects of HDL cholesterol and increase lipoprotein (a) which further increases the 
CHD risk. Recent studies have shown that replacement of SFAs with PUFAs (LA, ALA, LC n-3 
PUFAs) lower the risk of CHD and CHD events. However, the beneficial effects of individual 
PUFAs on various risk factors of CHD and CHD events are not similar. Compared to higher fat 
intakes, diets low in fat with high carbohydrate result in a metabolic pattern that increases the risk 
of type 2 diabetes and CHD. These changes include a reduction in serum HDL cholesterol and 
increase in the triglyceride concentrations; they show higher responses in postprandial glucose and 

100 
 



insulin concentrations. Studies on experimental animals17 and limited data in humans suggest that 
high intakes of either SFAs and or TFAs may contribute to insulin resistance whereas PUFAs may 
prevent insulin resistance5-7,16. The LC n-3 PUFA provided from fish and other sea foods lower 
serum triglycerides, postprandial lipemia and have beneficial effects on endothelial function, 
inflammation, vascular reactivity and ventricular arrhythmias. A strong inverse relationship is 
documented between fish or LC n-3 PUFA intake and CHD and some types of cancers5,8,14. 
 

Studies on the LDL cholesterol raising effects of dietary cholesterol have shown variable 
results; some studies have shown that the cholesterolemic effect of dietary cholesterol is reduced 
when diets provide high levels of PUFAs. Since reactive oxygen species increase the risk of DR-
NCD, an adequate intake of natural antioxidants from varied sources is consistent with good health 
and well being4,5,10.  
 

Non-glyceride components and their nutritional and health promoting effects 
 

Non-glyceride components of fats from animal foods contain cholesterol and  fat soluble 
vitamins (A, E, D) whereas plant foods and vegetable oils have, in addition to fat soluble vitamins 
(E, D, K and carotenoids), plant sterols and a wide range of other chemical compounds. Plant 
sterols and some of the unique non-glyceride components (oryzanols and sesame lignans) lower 
serum LDL cholesterol18,19. Vitamin E, carotenoids, sesame lignans, oryzanols and polyphenols 
have antioxidant effects. Hypocholesterolemic and antioxidant effects of a combination of 
nonglyceride components are greater than their individual effects. Increasing plant sterols and other 
non-glyceride components from natural plant foods and vegetable oils could therefore provide an 
additional dietary means for prevention and correction of dyslipidemia and increasing antioxidant 
potential of human diets19.  

 
6.2 Recommendations of FAO and WHO on dietary fats 
 

The World Health Organization (WHO) and the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) 
have been updating international recommendations on fats in human health.  

 

Recommendations of the first Expert Consultation20 took into account the then available 
information on functions of fats in food (source of energy and essential fatty acids, vehicle for fat 
soluble vitamins, cell structure, membrane functions and control of serum total cholesterol) and the 
safety aspects. In view of the adverse effects of erucic acid, it was recommended that levels of 
erucic acid in Brassica oils (rapeseed/mustard) should be reduced or these oils should be blended or 
mixed with other oils.  

 

The second Expert Consultation10 set the following recommendations after reviewing the 
many crucial and varied roles played by different types and levels of dietary fats and oils in human 
nutrition and health: 

 Requirements of fats and oils for adults were set between 15-30% E (35% E for active 
individuals who are in energy balance), at least 20% E for women in reproductive age and 30-
40% E for children up to 2 years. 

 Infants should be breast fed. Formula milk given to infants should mimic the fatty acid 
composition of human milk with respect to all fatty acids (including AA and DHA). 

 Recommendations for fatty acids considered elevated serum LDL cholesterol as a major risk 
factor for CHD. An upper limit of 10% E SFAs and <300 mg/d of dietary cholesterol, desirable 
intakes of LA between 4-10% E and ratio of LA: ALA between 5:1 to 10:1 were recommended. 

101 
 



Intake of leafy vegetables, legumes, fish and sea foods was to be encouraged to achieve a ratio 
of LA: ALA between 5:1 to 10:1. 

 The report acknowledged the need to ensure adequate intakes of essential fatty acids in 
pregnant and lactating women to meet the requirements for foetal and infant development. 

 The recommendations endorsed that consumers should substitute partially hydrogenated 
vegetable oils (PHVO) which is the major source of TFAs with liquid oils and soft fats. Food 
manufacturers should reduce TFAs in processed foods and foods high in TFAs should not be 
considered as low in SFAs. 

 Nutritional significance of antioxidants, namely carotenoids, tocopherols and other non-
glyceride components was highlighted. Foods high in PUFAs should contain at least 0.6 mg 
tocopherol (vitamin E) equivalents per gram to stabilize unsaturated fatty acids. 

 Use of red palm oil should be encouraged in countries where vitamin A deficiency is a public 
health problem.  

 

Using the criteria to define the strength of evidence between exposure and disease 
(convincing, probable, possible and insufficient), WHO/FAO Expert Group on Diet, Nutrition and 
Prevention of Chronic Diseases endorsed that qualitative composition of fats in the diet has a 
significant role to play in modifying risk factors of CVD and set the following ranges for population 
nutrient goals (%E): total fat, 15-30 (at least 20% E is consistent with good health), SFAs, <10%; 
PUFAs, 6-10;  n-6, 5-8;  n-3, 1-2;  TFAs,<1; MUFAs, by difference; cholesterol <300mg/day4. 

 

 The FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on fats and fatty acids in Human Nutrition held in 
November 2008 in Geneva, Switzerland, reviewed the scientific evidence on nutrient intake 
values for total fat and fatty acids for different life stages. It also assessed the risks to adequate 
growth, development and maintenance of health and provided recommendations for infants, 
children, adults and for women during pregnancy and lactation3,5-8,12,21. Following the same 
criteria employed in WHO/ FAO to define the strength of evidence4, the 2008 Consultation used 
evidence of sufficient strength to be ‘convincing’ or ‘probable’ to formulate a dietary 
recommendation22. Some of their conclusions and recommendations are as follows: 

 

There is convincing evidence on the following: 
 

 Energy balance is critical to maintain healthy body weight and ensure optimal nutrient 
intakes, regardless of macronutrient distribution of energy as % total fat and % total 
carbohydrates. 
 

SFAs 
 

 Replacing SFAs (C12:0 – C16:0) with PUFAs decreases LDL cholesterol concentration and 
the total/HDL cholesterol ratio. A similar but lesser effect is achieved by replacing these 
SFAs with MUFAs. 

 

 Replacing SFAs (C12:0 – C16:0) with carbohydrates decreases both LDL and HDL 
cholesterol concentration but does not change the total/HDL cholesterol ratio. 

 

 Replacing SFAs (C12:0 – C16:0) with TFAs decreases HDL cholesterol and increases the 
total /HDL cholesterol ratio. 

 

102 
 



 Considering the data from epidemiological studies on morbidity and mortality due to 
coronary heart disease (CHD) and controlled clinical trials (using CHD events and death), it 
was also agreed that replacing SFAs with PUFAs  decrease the risk of CHD. 

 

MUFAs 
 

 Replacing carbohydrates with MUFAs increases HDL cholesterol concentrations. 
 

 Replacing SFA (C12:0 – C16:0) with MUFA reduces LDL cholesterol concentration and 
total/HDL cholesterol ratio. 

 

PUFAs 
 

Linoleic acid (LA) and alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) are indispensable since they cannot be 
synthesized by humans. Minimum intake levels for essential fatty acids to prevent deficiency 
symptoms are estimated to be 2.5% E LA plus 0.5% E ALA. 
 

TFAs 
 

TFAs from commercial Partially Hydrogenated Vegetable Oils (PHVO) increase CHD risk 
factors and CHD events to a greater extent than what was thought earlier (6.16). 

 

a) Based on epidemiologic studies and randomized controlled trials of CHD events, 6%E has been 
fixed as the minimum recommended consumption level of total PUFAs for lowering LDL and 
total cholesterol concentrations, increasing HDL cholesterol concentrations and decreasing the 
risk of CHD events. 

b) Whilst ALA may have individual properties in their own right, there is evidence that the n-3 
LCPUFAs may contribute to the prevention of CHD and possibly other degenerative diseases of 
aging. 

c) Based on both the scientific evidence and conceptual limitations, there is no compelling 
scientific rationale for recommending a specific ratio of n-6 to n-3 fatty acids or LA to ALA, 
especially if intakes of n-6 and n-3 fats lie within the recommendations established in this 
report. 

 In promoting the removal of TFAs, which are predominantly a by-product of industrial 
processing (partial hydrogenation) usually in the form of PHVO, particular attention must be 
given to what would be their replacement; this is a challenge for the food industry. 

 

d) Recommendations for total fat and fatty acids: 
 

 Minimum total fat intakes for adultsa 
 15% E to ensure adequate consumption of total energy, essential fatty acids and fat-soluble 

vitamins for most individuals. 
 20% E for women of reproductive age and adults with BMI <18.5, especially in developing 

countries where dietary fat may be important to achieve adequate energy intake in 
malnourished populations. 

 30-35% E as maximum total fat intakes for most adultsa 
 Recommended intakes of individual fatty acids as summarized in Table 6.1 
a To optimize health, special attention should be given to both the overall dietary pattern, in 
terms of types of food consumed, and total energy intakes, in relation also to anthropometric 
(age group, BMI) and lifestyles characteristics. 

 

 

103 
 



6.3  Recommended dietary allowances for Indians in 1990 
 

Earlier recommendations on fat requirement for Indians23 considered the FAO/WHO 1977 
recommendations20 for i) total fat calories between 15-30% E and LA requirements for different 
groups (adult and children 3% E, pregnant women 4.5% E, lactating women 5.7% E) ii) took into 
account the LA content from invisible fat, and arrived at a minimum level of 5% E (12 g/p/d) 
visible fat derived from oils having at least 20% LA. Although a minimal intake of 12 g visible fat 
can meet LA requirement, a higher level of intake of 20 g/day (10% E) was recommended to 
provide energy density and palatability to the diet. In pregnant and lactating women, a higher 
visible fat (30 and 45 g/p/d respectively) was recommended to provide higher level of LA and the 
necessary calorie density. In young children, ~15%E (25g/child) visible fat was recommended to 
provide adequate calorie density in their bulky cereal- based diets. The upper limit of visible fat was 
estimated to be ~50 g/p/day (<20% E) considering the amount of fat from all foods in the diets of 
urban high income group (10-15% E). 
 

6.4  Sources of fat in Indian diets 
 

A small amount of fat is present in almost every food item (invisible fat).The fat in processed 
and ready to eat foods (hidden fat) and visible fat (vegetable oil, ghee, butter and vanaspati) used 
for cooking together contribute to total fat intake of an individual.  
 

Fats present as integral components of foods (invisible fat)  
 

Edible plant foods have a low content of fat and SFAs (except for nuts and oilseeds) and are 
fairly good sources of MUFAs and PUFAs. In most cereals, millets, legumes and pulses, fat content 
ranges between 1.5-3% (higher contents in maize, bajra, bengalgram and soyabean). In cereals, 
millets and most oilseeds, LA is the major fatty acid whereas pulses / legumes, green leafy 
vegetables, some oilseeds (soyabean, rapeseed/mustard, perilla seed and flaxseed) and fenugreek 
are good sources of both LA and ALA23. Animal foods (fatty dairy products like butter, ghee, whole 
milk, cream, fatty cheese and fatty meats) provide cholesterol, high amounts of SFAs and are a 
natural source of TFAs (<5 % of total fatty acids). Structural fats (lean meats) have a fairly high 
content of LC PUFAs24. The meats of ruminants grazed on grass and in the wild contain less fat, 
SFAs and higher LCn-3 PUFAs (ratio of LCn-6PUFAs/LCn-3PUFAs is less than 2) as compared to 
meats of those in captivity fed on grain based rations. Poultry meat contains less fat and cholesterol 
but appreciable amounts of PUFAs including LC PUFAs. Egg has high cholesterol but is a good 
source of LA, ALA and DHA24,25 and Table 6.7. Fish has less fat, SFAs and cholesterol and is a 
good source of LCn-3 PUFAs. Fat content and relative contents of EPA and DHA vary in fish and 
other sea foods24-26 and Table 6.7. If farm-raised fish are not fed abundant EPA and DHA, they will 
have far less of these nutrients than wild caught fish. The total quantity of invisible fat and its fatty 
acid composition depend on the kind of diet consumed17,24,28.  
 

Visible fats 
 

Vegetable oil used in cooking is the major type of visible fat consumed; vanaspati (PHVO) 
and ghee are the other sources. India has a wide range of edible vegetable oils (groundnut, 
rapeseed/mustard, soybean, sunflower, sesame, safflower, ricebran, cottonseed and linseed). The 
type of vegetable oil consumed varies from one part of the country to the other. Vanasapti promoted 
as desi ghee is used largely in north India (Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh) as 
cooking medium. In most parts of the country, vanasapti is used as a substitute for ghee in Indian 
sweets and savoury foods. It is also used in preparing commercially fried, processed, ready-to-eat, 
packaged, frozen, premixed foods and street foods. In recent years, health claims have affected the 
choice of cooking oil(s) in the urban population. The relative proportions of fatty acids are known 
to vary in different visible fats (Table 6.2). Depending on the percentage of various fatty acids, fats 

104 
 



and oils can be grouped as oils containing: i) high SFAs ii) high MUFAs iii) low (<20%), medium 
(20-40%) or high (>40-70%) LA and iv) both LA and ALA. The traditional rape-mustard seed oils 
contain ~50% erucic acid (C22:1). Concerns about possible deleterious effects of erucic acid 
(lipidosis and fibrosis in experimental animals) in humans led to the development of low / zero 
erucic acid rapeseed variety and the oil is sold as canola oil20.  Butter, ghee, coconut oil and palm 
kernel oils are rich sources of short and medium chain SFAs. Partial hydrogenation of vegetable 
oils results in the formation of several C 18:1 and C18:2 trans isomers; the chemical composition of 
these isomers is different from those of ruminant fats. During refining of vegetable oils, 
deodorization step contributes to formation of C18:2 trans isomers, the contents should be <1 % of 
total fatty acids. PHVO (vanasapti, bakery fats and margarines) is the main modifiable source of 
TFAs in Indian diets.     

 

Besides fatty acids, vegetable oils also contain minor components in the non-glyceride 
fraction which have specific health significance. The composition of non-glyceride components in 
dietary fats and oils is given in Table 6.3. Plant sterols and other unique components (oryzanols and 
sesame lignans) present in the non-glyceride component of vegetable oils contribute to lowering of 
total and low density lipoprotein cholesterol. 
 

6.5 Fat intake in Indians: An update  
 

Total fat intake is largely variable among rural and urban Indian population. Earlier diet 
surveys (2008) by the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau30 show that daily intake of visible fats 
in rural India (range 6-22 g, median 13 g/consumption unit) is about the same as reported about 25 
years back (range 3-20 g, median 10 g/consumption unit)30. The intake of total fat and PUFAs 
calculated by putting together the total fat (~14g/consumption unit, 6.5% E), and contents of LA 
and ALA from cereals, millets, pulses/legumes and milk and any one vegetable oil (median 13 
g/consumption unit) shows that diets of the rural population (including children, pregnant and 
lactating women) provide <14 % total fat calories (AMDR-Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution 
Ranges: 20-35% E). Depending on the type of vegetable oils consumed, levels of LA range between 
3 to 7% E (AMDR: 2.5-9% E) except when coconut oil / vanasapti are used. The levels of ALA are 
generally low (~ 0.2% E) except when mustard /rapeseed oil, linseed oil or soyabean oils are used 
(AMDR 0.5-2% E).  

Subsequent diet surveys by National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau show that the total fat 
intake in rural (2012)33 and urban (2016)34 India increased (rural - 20% E; urban - 23% E) 
compared to the previous survey conducted in 2008 (< 14% E). The visible fat intake in rural and 
urban population is 5% E (14gm/consumption unit) and 13% E (28gm/ consumption unit) 
respectively. Although the total fat intake in lactating women in urban and rural population is 
within the recommended range (urban-22.3% E, rural - 20.3% E), the fat intake in rural pregnant 
women (15.5 % E) is less compared to the urban pregnant women (23% E). The fat intake in urban 
children is within the recommended range (26.2% E and 25.0% E for the age group of 3-6 years and 
7-9 years respectively) whereas in rural children the fat intake is less (19.8% E and 17.1% E for the 
age group of 3-6 years and 7-9 years respectively). In urban and rural girls and boys of all the age 
groups, the fat intake is less (Urban <24% E and Rural < 21% E) compared to the recommended 
intake (AMDR for girls and boys 25% E).  Overall the fat intake in rural population particularly 
pregnant women, children, girls and boys are less.  Efforts to increase the dietary levels of total fat 
in the rural population would contribute to lifelong health and wellbeing. 
  

105 
 



Table 6.1: FAO/WHO 2008 recommendations for dietary fatty acids (% E) 
 

1 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 10 
Physiological Total PUFAs d otal n-3 LA ALA 

SFAs MUFAs TFAs c  T
 LCn-3 PUFAsi 

groups/age/ gender (n-6 +n-3) PUFAse (n-6) (n-3) 
Adult Man  AMDR 

AI 2.5-3.5f 
Adult Woman (NPNL) U-AMDR By AMDR AI 2-3 f L- 250 -2000k mg/d 

<1 AMDR 6g -11h 
Pregnant woman 10 difference b 0.5 -2 AMDR 2.5-9 AMDR  >0.5 300j mg 

 
Lactating woman  300 j mg 

LA - AI  HM DHA AI 0.1- 0.18l m 
composition as % AI U-AMDR no upper 

0–6 m HM HM - HM HM 
E of total fat 0.2-0.3m value, within the human 

Infants 
AA - AI 0.2-0.3 m range upto 1.5% E 

By 
6-24 m <10 - AI 3 - 4.5 AI 0.4-0.6 DHA  AI 

 
differenceb <1 U-AMDR  15 

 U-AMDR  10 U-AMDR  3 10-12mg/kgl 
3-6 y U-AMDR By  100-150 mg 

Children AMDR 11 - n n AI
 

7-9 y 8 a difference b <1 U-
 AI 200-250 mg 

10–12 y 
U-AMDR By  AI 

Boys 13–15 y U-AMDR 11 - n n 
8 a differenceb <1 200-250 mg 

16–17 y 
10–12 y 

U-AMDR By  
Girls 13–15 y -  

8 a difference b U-AMDR 11  n n AI
 

 <1 200-250 mg 
16–17 y 

Reference: 21    
% E : percentage total energy;    AMDR: accepted macronutrient dietary range;   L-AMDR lower limit of AMDR; U-MDR upper limit of AMDR; AI : adequate intake; HM : human milk; AA : arachidonic 
acid; DHA : docosahexaenoic acid; SFAs: saturated fatty acids; MUFAs: monounsaturated fatty acids; PUFAs: polyunsaturated fatty acids; TFAs : trans fatty acids; LA: linoleic acid; ALA: alpha-linolenic 
acid      
a children from families with evidence of familial  dyslipidemia (high LDL cholesterol) should receive lower SFA but not reduced total fat intake; 
b Total MUFAs: Total fat (%E) - SFAs (% E) - PUFAs (% E), can make upto 15-20%E according to total fat intake; 
c Total TFAs : from ruminants and partially hydrogenated vegetable oils; 
d Total PUFAs : LA +AA+ ALA+ EPA +DPA+ DHA; 
e Total n-3 PUFAs : LA+EPA+DPA+DHA;  fminimum  intake levels to prevent deficiency symptoms; 
g minimum recommended level for lowering LDL and total cholesterol, increasing HDL cholesterol concentrations and decreasing the risk of CHD events; 
h to prevent risk of lipid peroxidation particularly when tocopherol intake is low; 
I LCn-3 PUFAs : EPA+DPA+DHA from 1-2   fish meals  including oily fish / week;  jincluding  200mg DHA ; 
k including  supplements ( fish oil/ algal oil )for secondary prevention of  CHD (to prevent increased   risk of lipid peroxidation and reduced  cytokine production, 
l conditionally essential due to limited synthesis from ALA,  critical role in retinal and brain  development; 
m % fatty acids AA  0.4-0.6 , ALA  0.4-0.6  DHA 0.2-0.36; 
n have not yet been adequately established, recommendations set to be the same as in adults; 
Cholesterol : <300mg/day;  Natural antioxidants from wide variety of foods (including visible fats). 

106 
 



 

Table 6.2: Approximate fatty acid composition of dietary fats and oils 
consumed in India  (% of total fatty acids) 

 
Fats/ oils SFAs* MUFAs** LA ALA 

High medium chain SFAs 
Coconut 92 a, d 6 2 - 
Palm kernel 83b,d 15 2 - 
Butter/Ghee 68c,e,f 29 2 1 
High SFAs & MUFAs     
Palmolein 39 46 11 <0.5 
High MUFAs & Moderate LA 
Groundnuti  19 41 32 <0.5 
Rice branh 17 43 38 1 
Sesameh 16 41 42 <0.5 
High LA  
Cottonseedh  24 29 48 1 
Cornh 12 35 50 1 
Safflowerh 9 13 75 - 
Sunflowerh 12 22 62 - 
LA & ALA  
Soybeanh 14 24 53 7 
Canolah 6 60j 22 10 
Mustard/rapeseedh 4 65k 15 14 
Flaxseed 10 21 16 53 
High TFAs 
Vanasaptih 61 34g 5 - 

 

Reference 23,  
* SFAs include < C10:0, C12:0 (lauric), C14:0 (myrisitc), C16:0 (palmitic), C18:0 (stearic) 
 < C 10:0- a15, b9 c15; C12:0 and C14:0- d65, e14 
** Mainly cis C18:1 (oleic) other MUFAs when present indicated against superscripts 
 TFAs f5; g5 (Data from Indian Food Composition Tables - 2017);  
 SFAs and MUFAs  

   C20-24 h1 to 4, i~8; jC22:1 (erucic) ~2, kC22:1 (erucic) ~50 and C 20:1(gadoleic) ~ 5  

 
Table 6.3: Non-glyceride components in dietary fats and oils 

 

Biological and health  
Non-glyceride components Oil 

function 
Plant sterols All vegetable oils Hypocholesterolemic 
Tocopherols All vegetable oils Vitamin, Antioxidant 
Tocotrienols Palm , Rice bran Vitamin, Antioxidant 
Carotenes Red Palm Provitamin, Antioxidant 

Hypocholesterolemic 
Oryzanols Rice bran 

Antioxidant 
Hypocholesterolemic 

Sesamin Sesame 
Anti-inflammatory 

Sesamolin,  Sesamol Sesame Antioxidant 
Hydroxytyrosol, Phenolic acids Olive Antioxidant 

 

Reference: 19 

107 
 



 

In the urban middle and upper income groups, the daily intake of visible fat ranges between 
22-45g/p/d35-36 and total fat in their diets furnish 20-33% E36-37. Studies on plasma lipid fatty acid 
compositions in urban upper middle income groups have shown that a large proportion of Indian 
subjects have inadequate n-3 PUFA nutritional status 25, 17,37. It is necessary to increase n-3 PUFAs 
in the diets of the urban segments for providing fat quality consistent with good health25,17,29. 

 

6.6  Recommended intake of dietary fats for Indians 
 

Recommendations for dietary fats in Indians have been revised taking into account recent 
FAO and WHO recommendations4,9,16,20,22,23 for: i) total fat, individual fatty acids and health 
promoting non-glyceride components ii) sources of dietary fats in Indians and iii) availability of fat. 
The recommendations are directed towards meeting the requirements for optimal foetal and infant 
growth and development, maternal health and for combating chronic energy deficiency (children 
and adults) and DR-NCD in adults. 

 

Quantity of visible fat 
 

a) Minimum levels  
 

Adults: Taking into account:  i) ~10 % E fat from all foods except visible fats; average of ~7% E in 
rural India and 12 -14% E in urban segments25,17,29, ii) unfavourable effects of low fat-high 
carbohydrate diets5-8 and iii) depending on energy requirements set on the basis of age, 
physiological status and physical activity (Refer Chapter on Energy), the minimal intakes of visible 
fat in Indian adults should range between 20-40 g/person/day (Table  6.4). 
 

Pregnant and lactating women: The minimum level of total fat should be 20% E and AMDR is the 
same as for general population. Pregnant and lactating females, should consume at least 200 mg/d 
DHA for optimal adult health and foetal and infant development12,13,22. To furnish 20% E total fat, 
diets of pregnant and lactating women should contain at least 30 g visible fat (Table 6.4).  
 

Infants (0- 6 m): The recommended method of feeding healthy infants is breast milk. Fat content of 
human milk is relatively constant at 3-4% by weight and delivers 50-60% E. Human milk 
substitutes / infant formulas should have fat and individual fatty acid contents (including AA and 
DHA) similar to the levels in human milk. Addition of AA and DHA will enable the formula-fed 
infant to achieve the same blood LC PUFA nutritional status as that of the breast-fed infants12,13,21. 
Pre-term infants have a higher requirement for AA and DHA to allow rapid brain and body growth. 
 

Infants (6-24 m): Fat intake should be reduced to 35% E gradually, depending on the physical 
activity of the child from age 6 months to 2 years21,22. The mix of fat from breast milk and 
complementary foods should provide infants with at least 3–4.5% E from LA (U-AMDR 10 %E) 
and 0.4-0.6 % E from ALA (U-AMDR 3%E)21. In situations where breast milk intake is low, the 
level of fat, LA, ALA, AA and DHA in complementary foods should be increased so as to achieve 
the recommended intakes. Young preschool children’s diet should carry enough fat to provide 
optimal energy density and adequate calories41. Twenty five gram visible fat is recommended in 
diets of young children assuming 10% E fat from breast milk and infant formula plus fat from 
complementary foods (except visible fat). This level of visible fat would provide adequate energy 
density (reduce volume / bulkiness) in the child’s diet and contribute to prevention of chronic 
energy deficiency (Table 6.4). It would also ensure adequate supply and absorption of fat soluble 
vitamins40. The provision of dietary sources of DHA to infants should come from human milk / 
infant formula and complementary foods (Table 6.1). 
 

108 
 



 

Table 6.4: Recommendations for dietary fat intake in Indians 
 

Age/Gender/ Minimum Fat from foods 
Visible fatg 

physiological Physical activity level of Total other than 
groups fat (% E) a visible fatsd % E %E g/p/d 

Sedentary 25 
20 

Adult Men Moderate  10 10 30 
Heavy 40 
Sedentary 20 
Moderate 20 10 10 25 

Adult 
Heavy 30 

Women 
Pregnant women 30 

20 10 10 
Lactating women 30 
0 –   6 m 40-60 Human milki 

Infants 
6 -  24 m 35b 10c 25 25 
3-6 y 25 

Children 
7-9 y 30 
10 – 12 y 35 

Boys 13 – 15 y 45 
25 10 15 

16 – 18 y 50 
10 – 12 y 35 

Girls 13 – 15 y 40 
16 – 18 y 35 

 

aReference22,23 
b gradually reduce depending on physical activity 
c Human milk /infant formula+ complementary foods  
d if higher than 10%E,  visible  fat requirement  proportionately reduces 
g cooking oils, butter, ghee and  margarine 
i infant formulae/ milk  substitutes should mimic contents of fat and fatty acids in human milk including 

arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acid. 
 

Children and adolescents (2-17y): Total fat intake below 25%E is considered to affect growth in 
children and adolescents21. To provide 25% total fat calories, the minimum level of visible fat in 
diets of children and adolescents should range between 25-30 and 35-50 g/day respectively (Table 
6.4). Since the requirement of fatty acids for adolescents has not been adequately established, the 
recommendations for this age group are set to be the same as in adults21,22.  
 

b) Maximum levels   
 

In Table 6.4, minimum level of total fat (and visible fat) in the diet is suggested. However, the 
level of total fat (U-AMDR) that can be included in the diet should not exceed 30% E (about 60g 
visible fat/day). Fat intake exceeding 35% E may increase the risk of DR-NCD and should be 
avoided. However, fat intake in the daily diet can be between 20-30% E.  

 

Quality of fat 
 

a) Type of visible fat 
 

The quantity and fatty acid composition of both visible fat and fat from all other foods 
(invisible fats) contribute to the intake of various fatty acids in the total diet. The data on fatty acid 
intake in Indian adults determined by taking into account the contribution of various fatty acids 
from all foods (invisible fat) and either 20g or 50g visible fats (in diets of either rural or urban 

109 
 



 

population respectively) shows that a complete dependence on just one vegetable oil does not 
ensure the recommended intake of fatty acids for optimal health and prevention of DR-NCD25,29.  
To achieve intakes of individual fatty acids in Indians that are consistent with FAO/WHO 2008 
recommendations (Table 6.1); the types of visible fats and correct combination of vegetable oils to 
be used for different food applications are summarized in Table 6.525,29. A long term ‘in home’ 
study with oil combinations (which increase ALA) showed improvement of LC n-3 PUFA 
nutritional status in adults37.  

 

Table 6.5: Recommendations on type of visible fat# 
 

1. Use correct combination / blend of 2 or more vegetable oils (1:1)## 
 

Oil containing LA + oil containing both LA and ALA (Table 6.1, Columns 8 & 9)*                              
 
Groundnut / Sesamea/ Rice branb/ Cottonseed + Mustard/ Rapeseed** 
Groundnut /Sesamea/ Ricebranb/ Cottonseed + Canola 
Groundnut / Sesamea/ Rice branb / Cottonseed + Soyabean 
Palmoleinc+ Soyabean 
Safflower / Sunflower + Palm oil/Palmoleinc + Mustard/ Rapeseed**  
 
Oil containing high LA + oil containing moderate or low LA*** ( Table 6.1 
Column 8 )  
 
Sunflower / Safflower + Palmoleinc / Palm oilc / Olive  
Safflower / Sunflower + Groundnut / Sesamea/ Ricebranb/ cottonseed  
 

2. Limit use of butter/ghee d(Table 6.1, Column 2) 
3. Avoid use of PHVO as medium for cooking / frying  (Table 6.1 columns 2 & 4 ) 
4. Replacements for PHVO  (Table 6.1, column 4) 

 
Frying : oils which have higher thermal stability -- palm oilc/ palmoleinc, sesamea, 
ricebranb, cottonseed --  single / blends ( home /commercial) 
 
Bakery fat, shortening, Mithai / Indian sweets etc  --  Food applications which 
require solid fats : coconut oil/ palm kernel oil/ palm oil / palmolein/ palm stearin 
and / their solid fractions  and / their  blends 

 
Reference: 17, 19, 23, 29, 42, 43. 
#Wide sources  as part of a well balanced diet  
All vegetable oils contain tocopherols and plant sterols  
aSesame lignans,  boryzanols  +  tocotrienols,  ctocotrienols,  d vitamin  A & D 
##Furnish greater variety of   nonglyceride components   
* Approximately 30-40% PUFAs with >3 %ALA 
**Combinations with rapeseed/ mustard reduce erucic acid levels. 
***Approximately 40-50 % LA  and <0 .5 % ALA, recommended  only when intake of ALA from other 
foods / unconventional foods is increased  and or adequate amount of fish is consumed (Table  6.7) 
 
 
 
 

110 
 



 

b)  Quality of total fat from dietary components other than visible fats  
 

 The recommendations to ensure that the individual  fatty  acids from fats present as integral 
component of foods and ‘hidden’ fats from processed foods  (foods other than visible fat) contribute 
towards (along with visible fats consumed) ensuring optimal intakes of various fatty acids (Table 
6.1)  are summarized in table 6.6. Inclusion of foods which provide LCn-3 PUFAs is recommended 
for the prevention of DR-NCD and life-long health and well being (Table 6.7). Individuals / 
populations who do not consume fish should achieve higher intake of ALA (Table 6.7). Foods 
enriched with DHA and/or EPA from marine microalgae is a vegetarian source for LCn-3 PUFA. 

 
In brief, fat per se does not affect body weight but because it increases the palatability of the 

diet, it may increase energy intake and risk of DR-NCD.  Instead of recommending “prefer ‘low fat’ 
diets and avoid ‘fatty foods’ as a way to lose body weight and prevent DR-NCD”, a better advise 
would be on type of fat, namely, “consume / increase proportion of ‘good fats’ (polyunsaturated 
including n-3 and monounsaturated)”; limit /decrease proportion of ‘bad fats’ (saturated) and 
avoid/eliminate industrially produced trans fats (food additives) with focus on energy balance and 
physical activity. 

 

Table 6.6: Recommendations for optimizing quality of fat from foods                                          
other than visible fats* 

 

To increase n-3 PUFAs : (Table 6.1 Columns 7,9,10) 
 Consume foods which have high contents of ALA and / LCn-3 PUFAs  (Table 6.7). 
 Individuals / populations who do not consume fish should achieve higher intake of ALA. 

Oils and foods enriched with DHA  and or EPA from  marine microalgae are vegetarian 
source for LCn-3 PUFA 

To minimize TFAs :  (Table 6.1 Column 4) 
 Avoid foods prepared in PHVO (processed, premix, ready-to- eat and fast foods. 
 Consume low fat milk and dairy foods. 

To limit SFAs (Table 6.1, Column 2) 
 Consume low fat milk and dairy foods 
 Moderate  consumption of  beef, mutton 

To increase MUFAs & PUFAs, antioxidant vitamins and minerals 
 Consume whole nuts but total energy and fat calories should be within the recommended 

limits. 

 
References: 17, 23, 25, 29, 42, 43. 
 

 

111 
 



 

Table 6.7: Approximate quantity of foods required to furnish 0.1 g n-3 PUFAs 
 

Plant Foods (ALA) g Vegetable oils (ALA) G 
Cereal /Millet  Mustard / Rapeseed 0.7 
Wheat, Bajra 70 Soybean 1.5 
Oats (germ) 70 Canola  0.5 
Wheat (germ) 1.4 Flaxseed 0.2 
Pulses  LC n-3PUFAs from animal foods   
Black gram, Rajmah & Cow pea 20 Fish b  
Soybean 7 Low / medium  fat fish c  20-50 
Other pulses 60   

Oily fishd (>5 % fat ) 10 
Vegetables    
Green leafy 60 
Purslanea 25 
Radish seed (sprouted) 14 
Spirulina (dried) 12 
Spices  Poultry  
Fenugreek Seed 5 Egg   
Mustard Seed 2 Standard e 2-3 eggs 

DHA enriched (flaxseed)f,g,h 1 egg 
DHAenriched (meal from marine 1/3rd  
sources)f,g,h egg 
Chicken h 100 

Nuts  Lean meats  
Walnuts 2 Lamb, sheep, goat, beef, porki 150 
Almonds 25  
  Fish oils  

Cod liver j 0.5 
Muscle oil 0.3 

Unconventional oilseeds    
Flaxseed (linseed) 0.5 Vegetarian source of LC n-3 PUFAs To see 
Perilla seed 0.5 Algal oil-based DHA products  contents 

 on label 
 
References: 17, 22-28. 
a Richest source of ALA of any green leafy vegetable examined, source of EPA. 
b Good source of LCn-3 PUFAs,  oil and LCn-3 PUFAs. Contents vary markedly with species, season, diet, 

packaging and cooking methods.  
c Bam, beley,  bhekti, jew fish, lobster, pomphret, prawn, rohu, surmai, bombay duck, shark, thread fin, 

shrimp, cod, haddock, tuna, katla, mullet, sardines, halibut, albacore, mullet, mussels, crab, red tilapia, 
tilapia, cat fish, haddock. 

d Seer (white and black), mackerel, sardines, salmon, eel, cat fish (Mystusnemurus), red pomphrethilsa, 
purava. 

e Poultry feeds not including flaxseeds or fish meal, eggs also contain ~0.03g ALA. 
f Contain ~0.3g ALA. 
g Poultry feeds containing  either flaxseed or fish  meal. 
h Varies  depending on  ALA / fish meal in poultry feed.  
i Varies depending on nutrient composition of the diet, animals  grazed on pasteurs have  higher n-3 content 

than grain fed. 
j 600, 5 and 1 µg /g oil respectively for vitamins A, D and E. 

112 
 



 

References 

1. Ratnayake WN, Galli C. Fat and fatty acid terminology, methods of analysis and fat digestion and 
metabolism. Annals of nutrition and metabolism. 2009 Jan 1; 55(1/3):8-43. 

2. Galli C, Calder PC. Effects of fat and fatty acid intake on inflammatory and immune responses. Annals 
of nutrition & metabolism. 2009 Jan 1; 55(1/3):123-39. 

3. Crawford MA, Bazinet RP, Sinclair AJ. Fat Intake and CNS Functioning. Annals of nutrition & 
metabolism. 2009 Jan 1; 55(1/3):202-28. 

4. WHO/FAO. Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: Report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert 
Consultation. TRS 916, Geneva, 2003. 

5. Elmadfa I, Kornsteiner M. Fats and fatty acid requirements for adults. Annals of nutrition & metabolism. 
2009 Jan 1; 55(1/3):56-75. 

6. Melanson EL, Astrup A, Donahoo WT. The relationship between dietary fat and fatty acid intake and 
body weight, diabetes, and the metabolic syndrome. Annals of nutrition & metabolism. 2009 Jan 1; 
55(1/3):229-43. 

7. Sanders TA. Fat and fatty acid intake and metabolic effects in the human body. Annals of nutrition & 
metabolism. 2009 Jan 1; 55(1/3):162-72. 

8. Skeaff CM, Miller J. Dietary Fat and Coronary Heart Disease. Annals of nutrition & metabolism. 2009 
Jan 1; 55(1/3):173-201. 

9. Levy BD. Resolvins and protectins: natural pharmacophores for resolution biology. Prostaglandins, 
Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids (PLEFA). 2010 Apr 1; 82(4-6):327-32. 

10. FAO. Fats and oils in human nutrition: Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation FAO Technical 
Papers 57. Rome, FAO, 1994. 

11. Harris WS. The omega-6/omega-3 ratio and cardiovascular disease risk: uses and abuses. Current 
atherosclerosis reports. 2006 Nov 1; 8(6):453-9. 

12. Brenna JT, Lapillonne A. Background paper on fat and fatty acid requirements during pregnancy and 
lactation. Annals of nutrition & metabolism. 2009 Jan 1; 55(1/3):97-122. 

13. Koletzko B, Cetin I, Brenna JT, Perinatal Lipid Intake Working Group. Dietary fat intakes for pregnant 
and lactating women. British Journal of Nutrition. 2007 Nov; 98(5):873-7. 

14. Willett WC. The role of dietary n-6 fatty acids in the prevention of cardiovascular disease. Journal of 
Cardiovascular Medicine. 2007 Sep 1; 8:S42-5. 

15. Rastogi T, Reddy KS, Vaz M, Spiegelman D, Prabhakaran D, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Ascherio A. 
Diet and risk of ischemic heart disease in India. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2004 Apr 1; 
79(4):582-92. 

16. Uauy R, Aro A, Clarke R, L'abbé MR, Mozaffarian D, Skeaff CM, Stender S, Tavella M. WHO 
Scientific Update on trans fatty acids: summary and conclusions. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2009 May; 63(2):S68-75. 

17. Ghafoorunissa SA. Dietary Fat and Diet-Related Chronic Diseases: Indian Perspective. Touch. (Heinz 
Nutrition Foundation India). 2005; 7:2-6. 

18. Ellegård LH, Andersson SW, Normén AL, Andersson HA. Dietary plant sterols and cholesterol 
metabolism. Nutrition reviews. 2007 Jan 1; 65(1):39-45. 

19. Ghafoorunissa. Impact of quality of dietary fat on serum cholesterol and coronary heart disease: focus on 
plant sterols and other non-glyceride components. National Medical Journal of India. 2009 May 1; 
22(3):126-32. 

20. FAO report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Dietary Fats and Oils in Human Nutrition 
FAO Technical Papers 3. Rome, FAO, 1977. 

113 
 



 

21. Uauy R, Dangour AD. Fat and fatty acid requirements and recommendations for infants of 0–2 years and 
children of 2–18 years. Annals of nutrition & metabolism. 2009 Jan 1;55(1/3):76-96. 

22. World Health Organization. Interim summary of conclusions and dietary recommendations on total fat & 
fatty acids. From the joint FAO/WHO expert consultation on fats and fatty acids in human nutrition. 
2008 Nov 10:10-4.  

23. Misra A, Sharma R, Gulati S, Joshi SR, Sharma V, Ghafoorunissa IA, Joshi S, Laxmaiah A, Kurpad A, 
Raj RK, Mohan V. National Dietary Guidelines Consensus Group. Consensus dietary guidelines for 
healthy living and prevention of obesity, the metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and related disorders in 
Asian Indians. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2011; 13(6):683-94.  

24. ICMR, Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. Report of the Expert 
Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 1990. 

25. Ghafoorunissa. Fats in Indian diets and their nutritional and health implications. Lipids. 1996 Mar 1; 
31:S287-91. 

26. McCance and Widdowson’s The composition of foods : Amino acids mg/100g food, Fatty acids g/100g 
food   By A.A.Paul, D.A.T Southgate and J.Russell Seventh edit  Ministry of agriculture, Fisheries and 
food (MAFF), 1998  Elsevier/North -Holland Biomedical press. 

27. Whelan J, Rust C. Innovative dietary sources of n-3 fatty acids. Annual Reviews of Nutrition. 2006 Aug 
21; 26:75-103. 

28. Ghafoorunissa.  Fish and fish oil for nutritional security sustainable Indian fisheries, Pandian TJ (ed) 
272-288 National Academy of Agricultural Sciences, New Delhi, 2001. 

29. Ghafoorunissa. Requirements of dietary fats to meet nutritional needs & prevent the risk of 
atherosclerosis-An Indian perspective. Indian Journal of Medical Research. 1998 Nov 1; 108:191-202. 

30. Codex alimentarius commission, Report Of The Fifteenth session of The Codex Committee on fats and 
oils, London, United Kingdom, 4–8 November 1996. 

31. NNMB. Diet and nutritional status of population and prevalence of hypertension among adults in rural 
areas. Technical Report Series No 24, National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), Hyderabad, 2008. 

32.  NNMB. Report for the year 1979. Technical Report Series 6, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, 
National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), Hyderabad, 1980. 

33.  NNMB. Report for the year 2012. Technical Report Series, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, 
National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), Hyderabad, 2012. 

34.  NNMB. Report for the year 2016. Technical Report Series, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, 
National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), Hyderabad, 2016. 

35.  NNMB. Report on Urban Population, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, National Institute of 
Nutrition (ICMR), Hyderabad, 1982.  

36. Goyal U, Sadana B, Verma S. Contribution of various foods to fat and fatty acids intake among urban 
and semi-urban women of Punjab. Journal of Human Ecology. 2005 Nov 1; 18(3):217-20. 

37. Ghafoorunissa, Vani A, Laxmi, R, and Sesikeran B. Effects of dietary alpha-linolenic acid from blended 
oils on PUFA nutritional status and biochemical indices of coronary heart disease in Indians. Lipids. 
2002; 37(11): 1077-86.  

38. Radhika G, Van Dam RM, Sudha V, Ganesan A, Mohan V. Refined grain consumption and the 
metabolic syndrome in urban Asian Indians (Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology Study 57). 
Metabolism. 2009 May 1; 58(5):675-81.  

39. Misra A, Khurana L, Isharwal S, Bhardwaj S. South Asian diets and insulin resistance. British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2008 Oct; 101(4):465-73. 

40. Jayarajan P, Reddy V, Mohanram M. Effect of dietary fat on absorption of β carotene from green leafy 
vegetables in children. Indian Journal of Medical Research. 2013 May 1; 137(5). 

114 
 



 

41. Narasinga Rao, B.S. Low dietary fat intake as the main cause of widespread energy deficiency especially 
among preschool children in the developing countries. Malaysian Oil Science and Technology 1995; 
4: 139–46. 

42. Skeaff CM. Feasibility of recommending certain replacement or alternative fats. European journal of 
clinical nutrition. 2009 May; 63(2):S34-49. 

43. L'Abbé MR, Stender S, Skeaff CM, Tavella M. Approaches to removing trans fats from the food supply 
in industrialized and developing countries. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2009 May; 
63(2):S50-67. 

 

115 
 



7.1.  DIETARY FIBER 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Dietary fiber (DF) is broadly defined as the endogenous edible components present in plant 
materials or analogous carbohydrates which are resistant to digestion by the enzymes secreted in 
small intestine of mammalian digestive system. They are digested and absorbed in the mammalian 
with complete or partial fermentation in the large intestine. Dietary fiber includes polysaccharides, 
oligosaccharides, lignin and associated plant substances. Countries like Denmark, Finland, Norway, 
Sweden and Japan have defined the Dietary fiber as edible material that cannot be degraded by 
human endogenous enzymes, as measured by AOAC method 985.29. However, these countries had 
different approaches for the inclusion or exclusion of inulin and fructo-oligosaccharides in the 
dietary fiber. Dietary fiber promotes one or more of the beneficial physiological effects such as 
laxation, reduction in blood cholesterol, and/ or blood glucose attenuation. In the past three decades, 
dietary fiber has received large attention as one of the important macro nutrients.  

Structure  

Dietary fiber structure plays significant role in their physiological action with in human body. 
The dietary fiber structure provides the information about the solubility of dietary fiber in water and 
consequently their classification as soluble or insoluble dietary fiber. Plant food contains various 
types of dietary fiber with different name and structure. Cellulose and hemicelluloses are the 
predominant dietary fiber which contain β-(14) linked glucose units and arabinoxylan (AX) 
(14)-β-D-xylan backbone with single α-L-arabinofuranose units as side branches, respectively. 
On the other hand, β-glucan is linear polysaccharide and joined by β-(13) and β-(14)-D-
glucopyranose units, therefore classified as soluble dietary fiber1. Heteroxylans consists (1→4)-β-
D-xylan backbone highly substituted by single arabinose units, single glucuronic acid unit, and 
more complex short side chain containing arabinose, xylose and galactose while some heteroxylans 
of fruits and vegetable cell walls contain glucuronoxylans and glucurono-arabinoxylans (1→4)-β-
D-xylan backbone with glucuronic acid units and/or α-L-arabinofuranose units as substituents.  
Structurally the mannans (linear) abundantly found in date, green coffee bean and Aloe vera 
consists of β-(1→4)-linked β-D-mannopyranosyl residues whereas galactomannans prominently 
found in grain legumes which contains, mannans substituted with side chains of α-1, 6-linked 
galactose residues. However, glucomannans which is dominantly found in fungal cell wall consists 
β-(1→4)-linked linear mannan chain with interspersed glucose residues in the main chain and are 
often acetylated2.  

Type and sources  

Dietary fiber is classified according to their chemical structure, physico-chemical properties 
including water solubility, viscosity and fermentability. Dietary fiber is further subdivided into 
polysaccharides including non-starch polysaccharides (NSP) and resistant starch (RS) with the 
monomeric unit (MU) number of 10, and resistant oligosaccharides (RO) with MU number between 
3 to 93. Depending upon solubility in a buffer at specific pH and their in vitro fermentability using 
an aqueous enzyme solution representative of human alimentary enzymes, dietary fiber is classified 
as water soluble (well fermented fiber including gums, pectin and mucilage) and water insoluble 
dietary fiber (less fermented which includes hemicelluloses, cellulose, lignin). Most of the RS are 
insoluble in water while solubility of NSP is related to the monomeric unit number, composition 
and the linkage associated with the polymer. However, most of the resistant oligosaccharides are 
water soluble. Interestingly, certain non-starchy polysaccharides (soluble fibers) including β-glucan, 

116 
 



high molecular weight guar gum, psyllium and pectin have gel forming nature in intestinal tract 
thus may influence the glucose and lipid metabolism4. Fiber consumption through food significantly 
depends on the fiber content and portion of edible food since the outer layers of a food material has 
high concentration of dietary fiber. Some type of dietary fibers including RS, β-glucan, mucilage, 
gums, are found only in particular food such as β-glucan specific to barley, oat, mushrooms etc.,; 
RS is predominantly found in green banana, pectin in fruits and vegetables5.  

Nutritional and health significance  

Dietary fiber is considered to be a key component in healthy diet and known to provide many 
health benefits. Both insoluble and soluble dietary fibers play important physiological role in 
human health6. Insoluble fiber includes lignins, cellulose and some hemicelluloses which are the 
components of cell walls in grains and vegetables. Insoluble fiber works to promote laxation, 
speeding up intestinal transit time and adding bulk to the stool and therefore can prevent certain 
conditions such as constipation, hemorrhoids and diverticultis. Soluble fiber includes pectins, gums, 
mucilages and some hemicelluloses. This type of fiber takes up fluid in the gastrointestinal tract, 
forming a thick, gummy substance. Soluble fiber delays gastric emptying and intestinal transit time. 
Because of the large water-holding capacity of soluble dietary fiber, it binds to bile acids and help 
to reduce blood cholesterol levels. Soluble fiber gets fermented by bacteria in the large intestine, 
and the gastrointestinal tract catabolism leads to the generation of various bioactive materials, such 
as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), that can markedly enhance the gastrointestinal tract biomass and 
change the composition of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract flora7. 

It has been demonstrated by extensive research in the past three decades that sufficient dietary 
fiber intake has benefits for health maintenance and disease prevention including cardiovascular 
disease, diabetes, colon cancer and weight regulation through reducing the digestion and absorption 
of macronutrients and also decrease the contact time of carcinogens within the intestinal lumen8. By 
modulating food ingestion, digestion, absorption and metabolism, dietary fiber reduces the risk of 
hyperlipidemia, hypercholesterolemia and hyperglycemia. Emerging research has also begun to 
investigate the role of dietary fiber in immunomodulation7. Therefore, research on dietary fiber has 
drawn much attention recently, particularly in the growing nutraceutical industry9.  

Dietary fiber has been shown to inhibit absorption of micronutrients like minerals and some 
vitamins. However, the inhibitory effect was found to be confined to insoluble fiber component10-12. 
In fact, soluble fiber such as inulin and their oligosaccharides were shown to promote absorption of 
Mg, Ca, Fe, and Zn by increased permeability. Insoluble fiber binds the divalent elements minerals 
non-specifically and reduces their absorption. More recently, β-glucan, a soluble fiber component 
from bran of grains like barley, oats, and wheat, has gained utmost nutraceutical significance10, 13. 

Requirements 

Traditionally, fiber was considered as a non-nutrient component of food in the Indian context. 
The Indian Food Composition database has been updated methodologically to include the total, 
insoluble and soluble fractions of dietary fiber and is reported in IFCT 2017 (www.ifct2017.com)14. 
The amount of total dietary fiber and its components in commonly consumed cereals, pulses, 
vegetables and fruits is presented in Table 7.1. While computing total carbohydrates value, the total 
dietary fiber content should be deducted. The soluble fiber undergoing fermentation in the colon 
would provide 2 Kcal per g of fiber. Hence, the kcal of soluble dietary fiber needs to be considered 
while computing the total energy of the food.  

With economic transition, health transition too has taken place in India, resulting in abdominal 
obesity, insulin resistance, hypertension and cardiovascular risk aggravating the burden of diseases 
among its people. With more and more proportion of population shifting to processed, refined and 

117 
 



convenient foods, the importance of dietary fiber and its digestibility is acquiring greater 
significance particularly in the context of health transition. Very few studies have dealt with this 
aspect. Joshi and Agte15 estimated the digestibility of neutral detergent fiber (NDF) of diets with 
wheat and rice as staple foods and found NDF intake of 37.7 g with the digestibility of 34.1%. The 
overall fiber (intake 38g /d) digestibility was about 35%, in which lignin digestion was only 8%, 
hemicellulose was 53% and cellulose 30%. This 35% digestibility of fiber adds to the calorie 
content (about 13 g of digested fiber adds approximately 50 Kcal/d to the daily calorie intake). 
Similar database on fiber digestibility needs to be generated for all the major Indian foods to 
correctly assess the energific value of the diets and true energy intake.  It is clear that this digestible 
proportion of fiber will depend on the nature of the food, its proportion in the diet and the eating 
habits and lifestyle of the persons.  

Data from diets of the Western part of the country show that the dietary fiber content is about 
30-40 g/d16. Intake was increasing with increasing level of energy intake, 39-47 g/d in young men17. 
The fiber intake is lower in women (15-30 g/d) and is much less in tribal population (15-19 g/d)17 
(Table 7.2). Another report from North India shows that the average total fiber intake per day is 
about 52 g18. More data need to be generated in the Indian context to understand the phenomenon of 
health transition. 

Assessment of requirements of fiber is based mainly on normal large bowel function reflected 
to provide enough bulk and substrates for fermentation. Thus, stool weight and gut transit time were 
taken as indicators of large bowel function. Further, higher risks of chronic disease associated with 
lower dietary fiber intake, has helped to identify the requirements from the general public health 
point of view. There have been no studies on evaluating the dietary fiber requirements in Indians. 
However, the recommendations of US, SACN and other agencies that a minimum intake of 25-30 g 
of fiber is conducive for long-term good health10,12 can be considered as a positive guideline. WHO 
has recommended that the consumption of >25 g of total dietary fiber through the wholegrain 
cereals, fruits and vegetable for the prevention of chronic diseases19.  Intakes in excess of 60 g of 
fiber over a day can reduce the absorption of nutrients and may cause irritation in the bowel apart 
from leading to diarrhea. Based on energy intake, a level of about 40 g/2000 kcal in a diet is 
considered reasonably safe. However, with a steep increase in the consumption of processed and 
refined foods, consumption of fiber, at least in the urban high-income groups, may become critical. 
While there is a need to generate a strong evidence base systematically, it may be suggested to 
gradually diversify the diets to include increasing amounts of whole grains, pulses, legumes, 
vegetable and fruits to achieve the recommended fiber intake. 

Fiber is absent in the circulatory system as it is not absorbed. Therefore, measuring the 
nutritional status of DF may not be possible. Consumption of DF for various potential health 
benefits could be taken into consideration to calculate the DRI. However, due to insufficient 
information to calculate EAR followed by RDA, the dietary intake has been calculated based on the 
fiber intake of urban Indian population and given in Table 7.3. Fiber intake was not recorded for the 
healthy infants up to the age of 12 months who are fed human milk where, the DF is absent.  
Though there is no documentation on the consumption of DF as energy intake, the recommended 
intakes of DF will be added advantage on various other health benefits including constipation, 
reducing blood glucose and lipid levels and contribute for low energy- nutrient-rich food.  

 
 

 

118 
 



Table 7.1:  Different dietary fiber fractions in selected Indian foods 
 

Food Dietary Fiber (g/100g) 
Food Name 

group Total Insoluble Soluble 

Bajra (Pennisetum typhoideum) 11.49 9.14 2.34 

Jowar (Sorghum vulgare) 10.22 8.49 1.73 

Ragi (Eleusine coracana) 11.18 9.51 1.67 

Rice, raw, milled (Oryza sativa) 2.81 1.99 0.82 

Wheat, whole (Triticumaestivum) 11.23 9.63 1.60 

Bengal gram, whole (Cicer arietinum) 25.22 22.70 2.52 

Green gram, whole (Vigna radiata) 17.04 14.59 2.44 

Rajmah, red (Phaseolus vulgaris) 16.57 13.86 2.70 

Soya bean, brown (Glycine max) 21.55 16.56 5.00 

Amaranth leaves, green (Amaranthus gangeticus) 4.41 3.21 1.20 

Colocasia leaves, green (Colocasia anti-quorum) 5.60 4.32 1.29 

Drumstick leaves (Moringa oleifera) 8.21 6.12 2.10 

Tamarind leaves, tender (Tamarindus indica) 10.70 9.34 1.36 

Brinjal (Solanum melongena) 3.98 2.84 1.14 

Drumstick (Moringa oleifera) 6.83 5.60 1.23 

Ladies finger (Abelmoschus esculentus) 4.08 2.80 1.28 

Apple, big (Malus sylvestris) 2.59 1.43 1.16 

Pine apple  (Ananas comosus) 3.46 2.88 0.59 

Sapota (Achras sapota) 9.60 8.46 1.14 

Carrot, orange (Dacus carota) 4.18 2.81 1.37 

Potato, brown skin (Solanum tuberosum) 1.71 1.13 0.58 

Tapioca (Manihot esculenta) 4.61 3.85 0.76 

Chillies, red (Capsicum annum) 31.15 26.55 4.60 

Fenugreek seeds (Trigonella foenumgraecum) 47.55 27.63 19.92 

Pepper, black (Piper nigrum) 33.16 30.61 2.54 

Almond (Prunus amygdalus) 13.06 10.55 2.52 

Gingelly seeds, black (Sesamum indicum) 17.16 13.57 3.59 

Mustard seeds (Brassica nigra) 14.10 10.63 3.47 

Button mushroom, fresh (Agaricus sp.) 3.11 2.76 0.35 

Shiitake mushroom, fresh (Lentinula sp.) 3.02 2.03 0.99 

Oyster mushroom, dried (Pleurotus sp.) 39.12 35.64 3.48 

Source: Indian Food Composition Tables (www.ifct2017.com) 

119 
 

Mush Nuts and Condiments Roots and Other Green leafy Grain Cereals and 
Fruits 

rooms oil seeds and spices tubers vegetables vegetables legumes millets 



Table 7.2: Estimates of dietary fiber intakes in different income segments*  
reported from Western India 

 

Intake of fiber (g/d) 
Different segments 

Male Female 
Rural 39 30 
Tribal 19 15 

Industrial 41 31 
HIG 31 21 
MIG 43 22 
LIG 24 20 

 

Source: Reference (Agte et al., 1994)20 
LIG, MIG, HIG: Low, middle and high socioeconomic groups 

 
Table 7.3: Average intake of dietary fiber with reference to intakes of Urban India 

 

Age (Yrs) Males Females Total 
/ status 

(g/day) (g/1000kcal) (g/day) (g/1000kcal) (g/day) (g/1000kcal) 

10.8 12.50 10.3 11.94 10.6 12.28 
1-3 

(6.8-15.4) (8.92-16.50) (6.2-14.9) (8.70-15.90) (6.5-15.2) (8.79-16.15) 
17.0 14.80 16.3 14.89 16.6 14.87 

4-6 
(12.2-23.0) (11.14-18.66) (12.0-21.7) (11.39-18.81) (12.1-22.5) (11.28-18.71) 

20.3 15.64 19.5 15.74 19.9 15.68 
7-9 

(15.0-27.5) (12.01-19.89) (14.4-25.9) (12.47-19.91) (14.7-26.9) (12.27-19.89) 
25.1 16.78 22.5 16.40 23.9 16.56 

10-12 
(18.6-32.4) (13.08-21.14) (16.5-30.0) (12.87-20.73) (17.6-31.4) (12.99-20.90) 

28.0 17.41 25.3 16.99 26.6 17.20 
13-15 

(20.7-38.0) (13.26-21.88) (18.9-32.8) (13.24-21.68) (19.8-35.6) (13.25-21.82) 
31.9 18.23 25.6 17.12 28.6 17.67 

16-17 
(23.2-41.6) (13.92-22.85) (19.3-33.7) (13.34-21.47) (20.8-38.0) (13.69-22.13) 

35.6 18.32 30.0 17.41 32.4 17.84 
18-60 

(26.0-46.6) (14.02-22.55) (22.4-38.9) (13.60-21.45) (23.9-42.8) (13.79-22.01) 

60 & 34.5 18.76 26.8 17.56 30.2 18.08 
Above (25.3-44.8) (14.76-22.69) (19.9-35.9) (13.80-21.81) (21.9-40.4) (14.25-22.25) 

Activity Status 

35.7 18.65 29.7 17.52 31.9 17.97 
Sedentary 

(26.2-46.6) (14.38-22.70) (22.1-38.6) (13.72-21.58) (23.5-42.1) (13.98-22.07) 
34.8 17.64 28.5 15.90 33.4 17.32 

Moderate 
(25.2-45.9) (13.45-22.22) (20.9-37.7) (12.49-20.20) (24.2-44.3) (13.24-21.91) 

32.9 14.84 19.0 20.08 32.4 14.96 
Heavy 

(22.7-45.0) (12.61-18.59) (19.0-19.0) (20.08-20.08) (21.0-42.2) (12.74-18.66) 

Physiological Status 
29.8 17.26 

NPNL   
 (22.2-38.7) (13.49-21.36)  

30.8 17.83 
Pregnant   

 (23.0-40.6) (14.07-21.44)  
32.5 17.29 

Lactating   
 (23.9-39.7) (12.99-21.21)  

 

 

Values are Median (P25, P75); Source: NNMB Urban Survey 2016 
NPNL-Non Pregnant and Non Lactation 
 

120 
 



References 

1.  Stephen AM, Champ MM, Cloran SJ, Fleith M, van Lieshout L, Mejborn H, Burley VJ. Dietary fibre in 
Europe: current state of knowledge on definitions, sources, recommendations, intakes and relationships 
to health. Nutrition research reviews. 2017 Dec; 30(2):149-90. 

2.  Kumar V, Sinha AK, Makkar HP, de Boeck G, Becker K. Dietary roles of non-starch polysachharides in 
human nutrition: a review. Critical reviews in food science and nutrition. 2012 Oct 1; 52(10):899-935. 

3.  McCleary BV, Prosky L, editors. Advanced dietary fibre technology. Development of dietary fiber 
methodology pp. 77–86 Oxford: Blackwell Science; 2001. 

4.  Cummings JH (2001). The effect of dietary fiber on fecal weight and composition. In CRC Handbook of 
Dietary Fiber in Human Nutrition, pp. 183–252 [GA Spiller, editor]. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 

5.  Choo CL, Aziz NA. Effects of banana flour and β-glucan on the nutritional and sensory evaluation of 
noodles. Food Chemistry. 2010 Mar 1; 119(1):34-40. 

6.  EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA). Scientific Opinion on the 
substantiation of health claims related to xanthan gum and changes in bowel function (ID 837) pursuant 
to Article 13 (1) of Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006. EFSA Journal. 2011 Jun; 9(6):2272. 

7.  Kaczmarczyk MM, Miller MJ, Freund GG. The health benefits of dietary fiber: beyond the usual 
suspects of type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease and colon cancer. Metabolism. 2012 Aug 1; 
61(8):1058-66. 

8.  Anderson JW, Baird P, Davis RH, Ferreri S, Knudtson M, Koraym A, Waters V, Williams CL. Health 
benefits of dietary fiber. Nutrition reviews. 2009 Apr 1; 67(4):188-205. 

9.  Cheung PC. Mini-review on edible mushrooms as source of dietary fiber: Preparation and health 
benefits. Food Science and Human Wellness. 2013 Sep 1; 2(3-4):162-6. 

10. Lunn J, Buttriss JL. Carbohydrates and dietary fibre. Nutrition Bulletin. 2007 Mar; 32(1):21-64. 

11. Coudray C, Demigne C, Rayssiguier Y. Effects of dietary fibers on magnesium absorption in animals 
and humans. The Journal of nutrition. 2003 Jan 1; 133(1):1-4. 

12. Timm DA, Slavin JL. Dietary fiber and the relationship to chronic diseases. American Journal of 
Lifestyle Medicine. 2008 May; 2(3):233-40. 

13. Sheard NF, Clark NG, Brand-Miller JC, Franz MJ, Pi-Sunyer FX, Mayer-Davis E, Kulkarni K, Geil P. 
Dietary carbohydrate (amount and type) in the prevention and management of diabetes: a statement by 
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes care. 2004 Sep 1; 27(9):2266-71. 

14. Longvah T, An̲antan̲ I, Bhaskarachary K, Venkaiah K, Longvah T. Indian food composition tables. 
Hyderabad: National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research; 2017. 

15. Joshi S, Agte V. Digestibility of dietary fiber components in vegetarian men. Plant foods for human 
nutrition. 1995 Jul 1; 48(1):39-44. 

16. Joshi S, Mane S, Agte V. Analysis of insoluble fiber components in common Indian foods and habitual 
diets. Indian Journal of Clinical Biochemistry. 1991 Jul 1; 6(2):97-103. 

17. Agte VV, Chiplonkar SA, Tarwadi KV. Factors influencing zinc status of apparently healthy Indians. 
Journal of the American College of Nutrition. 2005 Oct 1; 24(5):334-41. 

18. Singh N, Makharia GK, Joshi YK. Dietary survey and total dietary fiber intake in patients with irritable 
bowel syndrome attending a tertiary referral hospital. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2008 Mar; 27(2):66-70. 

19. WHO. Report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation on Diet, Nutrition and prevention of chronic 
diseases, Technical Report Series No 916.WHO, Geneva, 2003. 

20. Agte V, Chiplonkar S, Joshi N, Paknikar K. Apparent absorption of copper and zinc from composite 
vegetarian diets in young Indian men. Annals of nutrition and metabolism. 1994; 38(1):13-9. 

 

121 
 



7.2. CARBOHYDRATES 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 

Carbohydrates (CHO) are a major and vital source of energy in the diet. The quantity and 
quality of CHO are important to maintain appropriate health and have been indicated to 
substantially impact nutrition related chronic disorders/non-communicable diseases (NCDs). For 
this purpose, the chapter on requirements of CHO including added sugars based on current evidence 
is included in this publication, to communicate to consumers to eat right amount and type of CHO. 

Classification 

The main classification of CHO is based on chemistry while the aspects of physical effects 
(food matrix), functional/ physiological effects and health consequences are also important. They 
are chemically classified, based on degree of polymerization (DP) into a) DP 1-2: sugars 
(monosaccharides and disaccharides) and polyols; b) DP 3-9: oligosaccharides (malto-
oligosaccharides and non-digestible oligosaccharides) and c) DP ≥10: polysaccharides (starch and 
non-starch polysaccharides). However, for ease of translation into nutritional effects, CHO are 
classified based on their digestion and absorption in the human small intestine into i) 
available/digestible/glycemic CHO that are absorbed and digested in the small intestine and 
available for further metabolism ii) unavailable/non-digestible/non-glycemic CHO that are resistant 
to digestion in the small intestine and reach the large intestine where they are either partially 
fermented by colonic bacteria to short chain fatty acids that are absorbed and metabolized to 
provide energy or are excreted1-3. 

Total Carbohydrates are calculated ‘by difference’ or by direct measurement of the individual 
components that are then added to give a total. The first method is used widely by many 
organizations and researchers around the world since the early 20th century4,5. It is derived by 
subtracting the moisture, protein, fat, ash and (alcohol) content of a food (that are directly 
determined), from the total weight of the food. This method has problems as it will also include the 
non-CHO components (viz., lignin, tannins, polyphenols, organic acids etc.,) including the 
analytical errors of each of these6,7. It does not allow identification of the types of CHO and thus 
their health effects. The direct measurement of total CHO and its components should be more 
preferred as it helps to relate with potential health benefits8. 

“Free sugars or Added sugars” refers to “all monosaccharides and disaccharides added to 
foods and beverages by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, as well as to sugars naturally present 
in honey, syrups, fruit juices and fruit juice concentrates”. However, free/added sugars do not 
include sugars naturally present in milk (lactose), whole fruit (fructose, glucose) and vegetables 
(fructose, sucrose)9-11.  

Functions 

CHO are the major source of easily available energy in human diets comprising more than 60-
78% of total energy intake, particularly in India12-15. In addition CHO rich foods also provide 
important micronutrients and phytochemicals. CHO is important to maintain glycemic homeostasis 
and gastrointestinal integrity and function7. Free sugars consumption may promote a positive 
energy balance as they contribute to the overall energy density of diets. 

Digestion and Absorption 

The monosaccharides i.e., glucose and galactose are actively absorbed in the small intestine 
via sodium glucose co-transporter 1(SGLT1) while fructose is taken up by facilitative transport16. 

122 
 



The di-, oligo- and poly-saccharides arehydrolyzed to their constituent monosaccharides and 
absorbed. Starch that is gelatinized by processing or cooking is digested majorly by pancreatic 
amylase in the small intestine. Resistant starch is the sum of starch and products of starch digestion 
that are not absorbed in the small bowel17. The non-digestible CHO are partially fermented by the 
commensal bacteria which contain enzymes capable of hydrolyzing them18. 

Metabolism 

CHO are principally metabolized to provide energy. The brain, central nervous system and red 
blood cells are almost totally dependent on glucose as a source of energy. After absorption, the 
monosaccharides are transported to liver which then enters the systemic circulation. Plasma insulin 
increases in response and the glucoseis taken up by cells (via GLUT transporters) and tissues 
(adipose and skeletal muscle) and is metabolized by glycolysis. Fructose uptake by tissues are non-
insulin dependent. The amount of energy yielded per unit weight of glucose, sucrose and starch 
respectively is 3.74, 3.92 and 4.18 kcal/g. The available energy from short chain fatty acids 
absorbed after fermentation in the colon is 1.9, 2.2, 1.9-2.2 and 1.4-2.4 kcal/g from non-starch 
polysaccharides, resistant starch, oligosaccharides and polyols19.  

The glucose breaks down to pyruvate by the glycolysis pathway. Pyruvate may be converted 
to lactate anaerobically or to acetyl CoA aerobically. Once it is converted to acetyl CoA, glucose is 
not retrievable. Glucose is metabolized and is stored as glycogen, which is the main source of 
energy. Making glucose from protein is called gluconeogenesis. When there is inadequate supply of 
CHO, ketone bodies are formed from fat fragments and in contrary when CHO is abundant, the 
body uses the glucose to make fat de novo20. 

Dietary Sources of CHO 

The major dietary sources of CHO are sugars, cereals & millets, roots & tubers, pulses & 
legumes and to a limited extent from vegetables, fruits and dairy. Indian dietaries are predominantly 
high in starch from cereals, millets and root vegetables. Examples are rice, wheat, sorgham, maize 
and potatoes. Sugars from fruits and vegetables are limited as consumption is very low. Sources of 
free/added sugars in diets are sugar sweetened carbonated beverages, fruit juices and concentrates, 
sweets & desserts, cakes, biscuits, chocolates & candies and beverages such as tea and coffee.  

CHO serve as the main source of energy for majority of the Indian population. The median 
intake of CHO by the Indian men and women are 320 g/d each providing 72 En% in the rural 
areas12 and 300 and 261 g/day respectively, providing about 60 En% in the urban areas13. Analysis 
of trends in intake from across NNMB surveys done from 1975 to most recent will provide 
important information. There is a need to generate/analyse existing data on the dietary contributors 
from different food groups to total CHO & added sugar intakes, its relation to energy intakes, 
prevalence of obesity and other diet related chronic conditions by systematically reviewing the data 
particularly from India and South East Asian countries and secondary data analysis. 

Health implications  

The nature and type of dietary CHO is more critical rather than the quantity of CHO for 
desired health effects. The evidence on the impact of dietary CHO on cardio metabolic and oral 
health is equivocal. CHO from whole grains, legumes, vegetables and whole fruits are associated 
with reduced risk of type-2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and cardiovascular disease (CVD) and the 
effects may mainly depends on specific components of CHO21,22. Association of consumption of 
white rice with increased risk and consumption of brown rice with reduced risk of T2DM in the 
Asian population, specifically in Japan and China is indicated, but the evidence is limited3.The 
contraindications of high intakes of unrefined complex CHO is little or is not well studied. There is 

123 
 



no conclusive evidence that diets higher in total CHO causes weight gain, however increased 
regular consumption of free sugars is associated with a greater risk of weight gain & higher body 
mass index in children, adolescents and adults 3,23, development of T2DM & NCDs24,25 and dental 
caries26,27. The sugar-sweetened beverages do not induce satiety to the same extent as solid forms of 
CHO and the discretionary calories from free sugars may replace the calories from the healthier 
nutrient dense foods, leading to an unhealthy diet11.  

Requirements and recommended intake of CHO 

Total Carbohydrates 

The minimal amount of CHO required, either from endogenous or exogenous sources, is 
determined by the brain’s requirement for glucose. The average minimum amount of glucose 
utilized by the brain is approximately 100 g/day10. The diets primarily consist of CHO, proteins and 
fats as the sources of energy; therefore, non-availability of glucose to the brain does not arise. 
However, the alternate source of energy, when the CHO consumption is very low and availability of 
glucose is less (eg. in prolonged starvation) energy needs is partially met by utilizing keto acids 
obtained from break down of fats or utilizing energy from endogenous protein catabolism28-31. This 
means that the brain can adapt to a CHO-free diet that is sufficient in energy. The endogenous 
glucose production rate, in the post absorptive phase, correlates well with the estimated size of the 
brain from birth to adult life32. The brain size after the age of 5y increases modestly while the 
consumption of glucose by the brain is fairly constant after 1y; thereby the requirement of CHO for 
children above 1y is similar to adults33. Also the rate of decrease in brain mass34 and that of 
decrease in glucose oxidation35 with advancing age is likely to be modest; therefore the requirement 
is same for all adults. The difference in brain glucose utilization between genders is negligible. The 
estimated average requirement (EAR) for CHO has been reported to be 100 g/day for ages1y and 
above with a Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) of 130 g/day, assuming a coefficient of 
variance (CV) of 15% based on variation in brain glucose utilization10. RDA is equal to EAR + 2 
times the CV. 

For children below 1y of age, an Adequate Intake (AI) value is suggested. The children below 
6 months of age, solely depend on human milk for supply of CHO. The CHO present in human 
milk is lactose. The human milk consumption during 2nd to the 6th month of lactation by full term 
infants exclusively fed human milk, is reported to be equivalent to 720-780 ml/day commensurate 
with requirements for maintenance and growth36-38 and the corresponding lactose content is 74 
g/L39,40. Considering human milk intake of 700 ml/day for Indian 0-6 month infants (as reported 
elsewhere in this report, the AI for CHO suggested is 52 g/day, rounded to 55 g/day (rounded 
upwards to the nearest 5 g). For children 7-12 months of age, the CHO content in human milk as 
well as that provided by complementary food is considered to derive the AI. Therefore, considering 
the CHO content of 44 g from human milk (based on an average volume of 600ml/day of human 
milk consumed by Indian infants) and that obtained from median intake of complementary foods by 
rural and urban 7-12 month Indian infants, to be 50 g/day12,13, and is similar to the usual intakes (51 
g/day) reported in the IOM document 41,42, the AI suggested for Indian infants in this age group is 
94 g/day, rounded to 95 g/day. 

During pregnancy, due to the establishment of the placental-fetal unit, there is an increased 
requirement for the energy yielding substrates to support maternal storage depots during early 
pregnancy as well as sustain growth and development of the fetus in the last trimester43. The 
developing fetus in utero utilizes glucose for energy needs. Assuming, the average infant brain 
weight to be 380 g34 and glucose utilization rate similar to that of adult brain (8.64 g/100g brain 
weight/day)10, the glucose requirement for the fetal brain in utero would be 32.8 g/day rounded to 
35 g/day. Therefore, the suggested EAR for CHO for pregnant women is 135 g/day which is 

124 
 



derived as the EAR of the non-pregnant non-lactating women (100 g/day) plus the additional 
requirement for the fetus during the last trimester (35 g/day). Considering a CV of 15% for 
variation in brain glucose utilization, the RDA for pregnant women is set at 175 g/day. 

During lactation, the requirement for CHO increases to support adequate lactose content in 
human milk. The lactate is synthesized from glucose and therefore the requirement of CHO 
increases. The lactose content of human milk is estimated to be 74 g/L with minimal variation 
during the lactation period. Assuming the average amount of human milk secreted is 700 ml/day, 
the additional requirement of CHO will be 52 g/day (74 x 0.7) rounded to 55 g/day. Therefore, the 
EAR for CHO during lactation would be 155 g/day that is derived as the EAR of the non-pregnant 
non-lactating women (100 g/day) plus the additional amount required to replace CHO secreted in 
human milk (55 g/day). Considering a CV of 15% for variation in brain glucose utilization, the 
RDA for lactating women is set at 200 g/day.  

The above DRI values may be adapted (Table 7.2.1) until recommendations can be made as 
more specific data is available from India, related to infant or adult brain size, lactose content of 
breast milk of healthy Indian women and the amount of CHO present in complementary foods 
consumed by Indian infants commensurate with good health and nutritional status. 

However, apart from CHO, there are other major essential sources of energy in the diet i.e., 
proteins and fat. Energy form all these sources is essential for various metabolic and physiological 
needs and a fine balance between them has to be ensured to establish nutritional adequacy and 
maintain optimal health. Thus, the Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Range (AMDR) as a 
proportion of total energy (En%) intake from CHO, proteins and fats has been suggested for 
individuals based on evidence from epidemiological studies and intervention trials for their 
association with reducing the risk of chronic disease in the long run and ensuring sufficient intakes 
of other essential nutrients and physical activity to maintain energy balance. More recently, a 25 
year follow-up cohort study from four US communities and meta-analysis of seven multinational 
studies indicate that the consumption of low CHO diets (providing less than 40 En%) as well as 
high CHO diets (more than 70 En%) was associated with higher risk of mortality. Moderate CHO 
consumption (50-55 En %) was associated with the lowest risk of mortality44.  

Rapid transition in India and shifts in lifestyle factors (diet and physical activity) contribute to 
over nutrition (overweight and obesity) linked non-communicable diseases (NCDs) at a rate 
surpassing under nutrition prevalence. This escalation in NCDs seen globally and particularly in 
low and middle income countries like India across all socio economic classes adds larger proportion 
to premature mortality45. India ranks 2nd in the world with the largest number of people with 
diabetes (77 million) and will continue to increase to 101 million by the year 203046-48. Life style 
factors such as diets, particularly cereal grains and physical inactivity influence, not only obesity 
but also cardio-metabolic factors such as insulin resistance, pre diabetes and diabetes. The ICMR- 
INDIAB study has reported a prevalence of 7.3% diabetes and 10.3% prediabetes49. Further they 
rapidly convert from normoglycemia to dysglycemia50,51. Pradeepa et. al., reported that female 
gender, diabetes, hypertension and high socioeconomic status are associated with generalized and 
central obesity51. Recent Global Health Observatory data had indicated 166 millions of overweight 
and obese adults in India52. Further it is known that dyslipidemia (low HDL, high triglyceride) is 
associated with total CHO and glycaemic load14. Dietary CHO provide maximum calories in Indian 
diets and more than half is contributed by refined grains in urban adults and 75% in rural adults. 
CHO intake is closer or a little above the upper margin of the range recommended by WHO (55 -
75% calories)53. Bulk of the calories is contributed by cereals and millets12,13,54. The percent energy 
from CHO is in the range of >60-78% in urban and rural areas12-15. Therefore, considering cultural 
aspects, changed scenario of physical activity levels as well as cost considerations, 55-60En% from 
CHO may be more advantageous with proteins contributing  10-15 En% and fats contributing 20-30 

125 
 



En%, while meeting the requirements of all other essential nutrients and non-nutrients that have 
possible health benefits.  The refined cereal grain intake should be reduced or replaced by whole 
grains. More than half the intake of cereal grains must consist of whole grains (intact grains). 

A tolerable upper limit (TUL) is not set for CHO probably because1) there is insufficient data 
on dietary intakes that indicate risk of adverse effects and/or 2) because of the inter-relationship 
between macronutrients to supply energy, it is not possible to identify if an observed adverse effect 
is caused either due to a high or a low intake of a certain macronutrient or both (a high intake of one 
and a low intake of another). Due to a lack of an established TUL, it is suggested to consume CHO 
within the suggested ranges of AMDR to maintain a healthy diet pattern and thereby avoid 
undesirable health effects. 

Added Sugars 

The World Health Organization in 2003 recommended that not more than 10% of total energy 
should be from free sugars/added sugars with a goal to reduce or prevent diet-related chronic 
diseases9. The Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition3 and the World Health Organization11in 
2015 have provisionally recommended a further reduction of free sugars to less than 5%.  

The systematic reviews and meta-analysis presented in the WHO11 and SACN3 documents 
indicate a positive association between consumption of free sugars and development of dental 
caries, primarily in children55. This risk is lower when the free sugar intake contributes less than 
10% of the total energy intake and decreased further when the free sugars contributed less that 5% 
of total energy intake. Similar observation in adults was not possible due to limited studies, but the 
risk may exist as was suggested that the aetiology of development of dental caries would be similar 
in adults too. The systematic review commissioned by WHO showed moderate evidence of an 
association of a reduction in free sugar intakes and a decreased risk of weight gain in children and 
adults56. An association between higher intakes of sugar sweetened beverages and higher incidence 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus in adults was reported57. Further, the WHO suggests including weight 
gain and dental caries as the key outcomes in studies related to free sugars intake11, as it is known 
that the risk of developing T2DM and CVD is often mediated through the effects of overweight and 
obesity, among other risk factors. Indians are at high risk of developing obesity (more fat in the 
body from day1 of birth) and are at high risk of developing metabolic syndrome and diabetes58. 
Hence it is good to restrict dietary free sugars to 5-7 En%. More research is required from India to 
define the upper limit for free sugars/added sugars that is commensurate with reduced risk of 
obesity, chronic diseases and dental caries. 

The suggestions elucidated above may be adopted until more data specific to India is 
generated through systematic reviews and meta-analysis of their roles in reducing the risk of 
chronic diseases while satisfying requirements of other essential nutrients conducive to good health.   

Glycaemic index, glycaemic load and health implications 

CHO-containing foods influence the post-prandial glycaemic response. The glycemic index 
(GI) of a food is the blood glucose response after consuming a CHO containing food relative to a 
CHO containing reference food (usually 50g available carbohydrate), viz., glucose or white bread 
under standard conditions59. The glycemic index (GI) of foods is categorized into three groups: a GI 
value below 55 is defined as low, 56 to 69 as moderate and 70 and above as high60,61. Glycemic 
load (GL) considers the GI and the total amount of available CHO present in the food consumed 
(GL=GI/100 x CHO content). GL value is categorized as low (≤10), moderate (10-19) and high 
(≥20)62. A weighted GI/GL value can also be calculated for mixed meals or whole diets63,64. Foster-
Powell et al65 and Atkinson et al66 have compiled international tables with the average GI and GL 
values of several common foods derived from multiple studies, including a few Indian foods    
(Table 7.2.2). 

126 
 



Both the GI and GL of the food are important determinants of the post-prandial plasma 
glucose response. A food with very high GI but if consumed in lower amounts, will provide only a 
small amount of CHO and hence will have a small GL and vice versa. Therefore, portion size of the 
food consumed is also important in eliciting the glycemic response. The amount of CHO, type of 
CHO component, amount of protein and fat, food matrix, nutrient interactions, type of food 
processing, other food components, etc., influence the glycemic response62,67-72. Many researchers 
have associated the consumption of natural and minimally processed cereals, vegetables and fruits 
with health benefits by virtue of their low GI/GL62. Low GI/GL foods that contain sugars (sucrose) 
and undesirable fats may have a lower glycemic response but are energy dense and are not 
necessarily healthy73. Therefore, GI/GL and glycemic response alone cannot be used; other 
attributes mentioned above should also be considered before associating a health benefit. The 
longitudinal observational study among 53644 Danish subjects over 12 years revealed that 
substituting saturated fat with CHO with low GI reduced cardiovascular risk while CHO with high 
GI increased the risk of myocardial infarction74. Another 5 year follow up cohort study among 
64,633 Japanese men and women indicated an association between dietary glycemic load and 
higher risk of T2DM among women and a higher dietary glycemic index was associated risk of 
T2DM among men who consumed a higher dietary fat75. Though findings from observation 
studies76,77 (Jenkins, 2002; Greenwood et al, 2013) indicate predictable effects of dietary GI and GL 
on circulating glucose, hemoglobin A1c, insulin, triacylglycerol and high density lipoprotein 
(HDL), results from meta-analysis of RCTs and prospective cohort studies are inconclusive3. 
Radhika et al14 have reported that dyslipidemia (low HDL, high triglycerides) is associated with 
total CHO and GL in Indian adults. As such, it is plausible to expect a low GI diet to reduce risk of 
T2DM and CVD. However, sufficient evidence needed to recommend substantial dietary changes 
based on GI/GL are not available. 

In India more research into glycemic response of individual foods, mixed meals and whole 
diets is required to be estimated under standard conditions in a sufficiently large number of 
subjects. Therefore, a GI and GL data base for Indian foods and common Indian recipes from 
different geographical regions is the need of the hour. Recommendations on the use of GI or GL 
can be made as more data becomes available from India.  

Recommendations for further research 

The following priority areas of research are recommended: 

• There is a need to estimate content of CHO and its components in foods by direct measurement 
rather than adopting ‘the difference’ method and inclusion of the same in the national FCT 
document.  

• To develop a database on glycaemic index and glycaemic load of various CHO rich foods and 
commonly consumed mixed dishes in different regions of India. 

• Systematic reviews & meta-analyses to be commissioned for data generated in the previous 10-
20 years from India and nearby countries, relating to role of CHO and its components on health 
implications such as obesity, T2DM, CVD, Dental Caries etc., 

• Evaluation of different approaches to promote the reduction of free/added sugars intake 
including the intake of sugar-sweetened beverages particularly in children and adolescents. 

• To generate evidence on different dietary exposure levels to understand the mechanism of sugar 
consumption and its effect on energy intakes and health.  

• Studies to investigate the levels at which adverse effects occur with chronic high intakes of 
CHO, fibre, fat, and protein. 

127 
 



• Research on the contribution of chronic exposure to total CHO, type of CHO and dietary patterns 
to insulin resistance, T2DM, CVD and other chronic disorders such as oral health. 

• Long-term studies on the role of glycaemic index in preventing chronic diseases, such as 
diabetes and coronary heart disease, in healthy individuals. 

• Research on efficacy of low GI and low GL whole food diets on risk factors of chronic disorders 
and its complications. 

• To conduct high quality research with sufficient duration of dietary exposures in RCTs with 
appropriate data on mean change, variances etc., to better inform interpretation of outcomes. 

 

Table 7.2.1: Dietary Reference Intakes for CHO 

Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average Requirements (EAR) and Recommended Dietary 
Allowances (RDA) for dietary CHO by age group and physiological status 

 

Group Criterion EAR RDA 

Infants, Boys and Girls 

0-6 mo. Mean content of CHO in human milk 55 g/d(AI) 

Mean intake of CHO from human milk 
6-12 mo. 95 g/d (AI) 

and complementary foods 

Children 

1 - 3 y, Boys 100 g/d 130 g/d 
1 - 3 y, Girls 100 g/d 130 g/d 
4 - 6 y, Boys 100 g/d 130 g/d 

Extrapolated from Adult Values 
4 - 6 y, Girls 100 g/d 130 g/d 
7 - 9 y, Boys 100 g/d 130 g/d 
7 - 9 y, Girls 100 g/d 130 g/d 

Adolescents 

10 - 12 y, Boys 100 g/d 130 g/d 
10 - 12 y, Girls 100 g/d 130 g/d 
13 - 15 y, Boys 100 g/d 130 g/d 

Extrapolated from Adult Values 
13 - 15 y, Girls 100 g/d 130 g/d 
16 - 18 y, Boys 100 g/d 130 g/d 
16 - 18 y, Girls 100 g/d 130 g/d 

Adults 

18 y and above, Men 100 g/d 130 g/d 
Amount of glucose utilized by brain 

18 y and above, Women 100 g/d 130 g/d 

EAR of Adult women plus amount of 
Pregnant Women 135 g/d 175 g/d 

glucose utilized by fetal brain 
Lactating Mothers, 0-6 mo. 155 g/d 200 g/d 

EAR of Adult women plus mean 
Lactating Mothers, 7-12 content of CHO in human milk 155 g/d 200 g/d 
mo. 

128 
 



Table 7.2.2: Glycaemic Index and Glycaemic Load of some commonly consumed              
Indian foods* 

Glycaemic Index Serving size Available CHO  Glycaemic Load               
Foods 

(Glucose=100) (g/ml) (g) per serve 

Cereals including breakfast cereals, Pulses and Legumes and Cereal Pulse combinations 

Whole wheat bread   74+ 2 30 15 11 
Wheat Roti                                                  66+9 30 16 10 
Wheat Chapathi 52+ 4 60 32 21 
Poori 70 +13 150  41 28 
Semolina Upma 68+ 1 150   42 28 
White rice, boiled                                  73+ 4 150 40 29 
Brown rice, boiled                                   68+ 4 150 33 16 
Bajra Roti 57+5 75 50 29 
Barley# 28+2 NA NA NA 
Sweet corn                                                 53+4 150 32 17 
Corn flakes                                                 8 1+ 6 30   26 21 
Porridge, rolled oats                                 55+ 2 250 22 13 
Instant oat porridge                                 79+ 3 250 26 17 
Rice porridge  78+ 9 150 36 25 
Millet porridge                                          67+ 5 150 36 25 
Muesli                                                       57+ 2 30 19 11 
Chickpeas                                                   2  8  +   9 150 30 8 
Lentils                                                         3  2  +   5 150 17 5 
Soya beans                                                  1  6  + 1 150 6 1 
Rajmah, soaked & steamed 70 +11 150 25 17 
Dhokla 33+ 2 100   20 6 
Cheela, green gram 38 +1 150   26 10 
Cheela, bengal gram 36+1 150   28 10 
Dosa 66+ 11 150   39 26 
Idli 69+ 9 250   52 36 
Pongal 68 +23 250   52 35 

Vegetables, Fruits and their products 
Potato, boiled                       78+ 4 150 28 14 
Potato, instant mash           87+ 3 150 20 17 
Potato, french fries             63+ 5 150 29 22 
Carrot, boiled                    39+ 4 80 6 3 
Sweet potato, boiled          63+ 6 150 28 17 
Plantain/green banana      55+ 6 120 21 8 
Green Peas 54 +14 80 7 4 
Vegetable soup# 48+ 5 NA NA NA 
Apple  36+ 2 120   15 6 
Watermelon  76+ 4 120 6 4 
Orange  43+ 3 120   11 5 
Banana  51+ 3 30 20 12 
Pineapple  59+ 8 120 13 7 
Mango  51+ 5 120 17 8 
Papaya 60+16 120 29 17 
Dates  42+ 4 60 40 42 
Strawberry Jam         49+ 3 30 20 10 
Apple juice                          41+ 2 250 28 11 
Orange juice                       50+ 2 250 23 12 

Dairy products  
Milk, full fat                                                3 9 + 3 250 12 3 
Milk, skim# 37+ 4 NA NA NA 
Ice cream                                                    5 1 + 3 50 13 8 
Yogurt, fruit# 41+ 2 NA NA NA 

Snacks 
Chocolate                                      40+ 3 50 10 4 
Popcorn                                         65+ 5 20 11 8 
Potato chips                                 56+ 3 50 21 11 
Soft drink / Soda# 59+ 3 NA NA NA 

 Sources: Extracted from International tables on GI and GL Values published by *Foster-Powell et al, 200265; 
#Atkinson et al., 200866. 
 129 

 



 
References 
 

1. Cummings JH, Stephen AM. Carbohydrate terminology and classification. European journal of clinical 
nutrition. 2007 Dec; 61(1):S5-18. 

2. EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition, and Allergies (NDA). Scientific opinion on dietary 
reference values for carbohydrates and dietary fibre. EFSA Journal. 2010 Mar; 8(3):1462. 

3. England PH. SACN Carbohydrates and Health Report. London: TSO. 2015. 

4. Atwater WO, Woods CD. The Chemical Composition of American Food Materials. Experiment Station 
Bulletin no. 28. 

5. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) (2007). Available from http://www.ars.usda. 
gov/nutrientdata. 

6. Southgate DA. Digestion and metabolism of sugars. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1995 Jul 
1; 62(1):203S-10S. 

7. UN Food and Agriculture Organization. Carbohydrates in human nutrition: report of a joint FAO–WHO 
expert consultation. 

8. McCance RA, Lawrence RD. The Carbohydrate Content of Foods. The Carbohydrate Content of Foods. 
1929(135). 

9. World Health Organization. Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint 
WHO/FAO expert consultation. World Health Organization; 2003 Apr 22. 

10. Table M. Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fiber, fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein, 
and amino acids. National Academy Press: Washington, DC, USA; 2005.  

11. World Health Organization. Guideline: sugars intake for adults and children. World Health 
Organization; 2015 Mar 31. 

12. NNMB. Diet  and  nutritional  status  of  rural  population,  prevalence  of  hypertension  and  diabetes  
among  adults  and  infant  and  young  child  feeding  practices. Report of third repeat survey. National 
Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, Technical Report No: 26. National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), 
Hyderabad, 2012. 

13. NNMB. Diet and Nutritional Status of Urban Population in India and prevalence of obesity, 
hypertension, diabetes and hyperlipidemia in urban men and women- a brief NNMB urban nutrition 
report. NNMB Technical Report No.27. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau National Institute of 
Nutrition (ICMR), Hyderabad, 2017. 

14. Radhika G, Ganesan A, Sathya RM, Sudha V, Mohan V. Dietary carbohydrates, glycemic load and 
serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations among South Indian adults. European journal 
of clinical nutrition. 2009 Mar; 63(3):413-20. 

15. Sowmya N, Lakshmipriya N, Arumugam K, Venkatachalam S, Vijayalakshmi P, Ruchi V, Geetha G, 
Anjana RM, Mohan V, Krishnaswamy K, Sudha V. Comparison of dietary profile of a rural south Indian 
population with the current dietary recommendations for prevention of non-communicable diseases 
(CURES 147). The Indian journal of medical research. 2016 Jul; 144(1):112. 

16. Thorens B, Mueckler M. Glucose transporters in the 21st Century. American Journal of Physiology-
Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2010 Feb; 298(2):E141-5. 

17. Champ M, Langkilde AM, Brouns F, Kettlitz B, Le Bail-Collet Y. Advances in dietary fibre 
characterisation. 2. Consumption, chemistry, physiology and measurement of resistant starch; 
implications for health and food labelling. Nutrition research reviews. 2003 Dec; 16(2):143-61. 

18. Flint HJ, Scott KP, Duncan SH, Louis P, Forano E. Microbial degradation of complex carbohydrates in 
the gut. Gut microbes. 2012 Jul 14; 3(4):289-306. 

130 
 



19. Elia M, Cummings JH. Physiological aspects of energy metabolism and gastrointestinal effects of 
carbohydrates. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2007 Nov 9; 61(S1):S40. 

20. Glimcher LH, Lee AH. From sugar to fat: How the transcription factor XBP1 regulates hepatic 
lipogenesis. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2009 Sep; 1173(Suppl 1):E2. 

21. Forouhi NG, Misra A, Mohan V, Taylor R, Yancy W. Dietary and nutritional approaches for prevention 
and management of type 2 diabetes. Bmj. 2018 Jun 13; 361:k2234. 

22. Anand SS, Hawkes C, De Souza RJ, Mente A, Dehghan M, Nugent R, Zulyniak MA, Weis T, Bernstein 
AM, Krauss RM, Kromhout D. Food consumption and its impact on cardiovascular disease: importance 
of solutions focused on the globalized food system: a report from the workshop convened by the World 
Heart Federation. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2015 Oct 6; 66(14):1590-614. 

23. Malik VS, Pan A, Willett WC, Hu FB. Sugar-sweetened beverages and weight gain in children and 
adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2013 Oct 1; 
98(4):1084-102. 

24. Malik VS, Popkin BM, Bray GA, Després JP, Willett WC, Hu FB. Sugar-sweetened beverages and risk 
of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes care. 2010 Nov 1; 33(11):2477-83. 

25. Hauner H, Bechthold A, Boeing H, Brönstrup A, Buyken A, Leschik-Bonnet E, Linseisen J, Schulze M, 
Strohm D, Wolfram G. Evidence-based guideline of the German Nutrition Society: carbohydrate intake 
and prevention of nutrition-related diseases. Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism. 2012; 60(Suppl. 1):1-
58. 

26. Sheiham A, James WP. A new understanding of the relationship between sugars, dental caries and 
fluoride use: implications for limits on sugars consumption. Public health nutrition. 2014 Oct; 
17(10):2176-84. 

27. Breda J, Jewell J, Keller A. The importance of the World Health Organization sugar guidelines for dental 
health and obesity prevention. Caries research. 2019; 53(2):149-52. 

28. Carlson MG, Snead WL, Campbell PJ. Fuel and energy metabolism in fasting humans. The American 
journal of clinical nutrition. 1994 Jul 1; 60(1):29-36. 

29. Owen OE, Smalley KJ, D’Alessio DA, Mozzoli MA, Dawson EK. Protein, fat, and carbohydrate 
requirements during starvation: anaplerosis and cataplerosis. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 
1998 Jul 1; 68(1):12-34. 

30. Streja DA, Steiner G, Marliss EB, Vranic M. Turnover and recycling of glucose in man during 
prolonged fasting. Metabolism. 1977 Oct 1; 26(10):1089-98. 

31. Sokoloff LO. Metabolism of ketone bodies by the brain. Annual review of medicine. 1973 Feb; 
24(1):271-80. 

32. Dobbing J, Sands J. Quantitative growth and development of human brain. Archives of disease in 
childhood. 1973 Oct 1; 48(10):757-67. 

33. Sokoloff L, GG F, EE K. Cerebral nutrition and energy metabolism. 

34. Dekaban AS, Sadowsky D. Changes in brain weights during the span of human life: relation of brain 
weights to body heights and body weights. Annals of Neurology: Official Journal of the American 
Neurological Association and the Child Neurology Society. 1978 Oct; 4(4):345-56. 

35. Robert JJ, Cummins JC, Wolfe RR, Durkot M, Matthews DE, Zhao XH, Bier DM, Young VR. 
Quantitative aspects of glucose production and metabolism in healthy elderly subjects. Diabetes. 1982 
Mar 1; 31(3):203-11. 

36. Butte NF, Garza C, Smith EB, Nichols BL. Human milk intake and growth in exclusively breast-fed 
infants. The Journal of pediatrics. 1984 Feb 1; 104(2):187-95. 

37. Atkinson S, Alston-Mills BR, Lönnerdal BO, Neville MC. Major minerals and ionic constituents of 
human and bovine milks. In Handbook of milk composition 1995 Jan 1 (pp. 593-622). Academic press. 

131 
 



38. Neville MC, Keller R, Seacat J, Lutes V, Neifert M, Casey C, Allen J, Archer P. Studies in human 
lactation: milk volumes in lactating women during the onset of lactation and full lactation. The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1988 Dec 1; 48(6):1375-86. 

39. Dewey KG, Lönnerdal B. Milk and nutrient intake of breast-fed infants from 1 to 6 months: relation to 
growth and fatness. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition. 1983 Jan 1; 2(3):497-506. 

40. Nommsen LA, Lovelady CA, Heinig MJ, Lönnerdal B, Dewey KG. Determinants of energy, protein, 
lipid, and lactose concentrations in human milk during the first 12 mo of lactation: the DARLING Study. 
The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1991 Feb 1; 53(2):457-65. 

41. Heinig MJ, Nommsen LA, Peerson JM, Lonnerdal BA, Dewey KG. Energy and protein intakes of 
breast-fed and formula-fed infants during the first year of life and their association with growth velocity: 
the DARLING Study. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1993 Aug 1; 58(2):152-61. 

42. Specker BL, Beck A, Kalkwarf H, Ho M. Randomized trial of varying mineral intake on total body bone 
mineral accretion during the first year of life. Pediatrics. 1997 Jun 1; 99(6):e12-. 

43. Knopp RH, Saudek CD, Arky RA, O'sullivan JB. Two phases of adipose tissue metabolism in 
pregnancy: maternal adaptations for fetal growth. Endocrinology. 1973 Apr 1; 92(4):984-8. 

44. Seidelmann SB, Claggett B, Cheng S, Henglin M, Shah A, Steffen LM, Folsom AR, Rimm EB, Willett 
WC, Solomon SD. Dietary carbohydrate intake and mortality: a prospective cohort study and meta-
analysis. The Lancet Public Health. 2018 Sep 1; 3(9):e419-28. 

45. GBD 2017 Risk Factor Collaborators. Global, regional, and national comparative risk assessment of 84 
behavioural, environmental and occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks for 195 countries 
and territories, 1990–2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet 
(London, England). 2018 Nov 10; 392(10159):1923. 

46. Ogurtsova K, da Rocha Fernandes JD, Huang Y, Linnenkamp U, Guariguata L, Cho NH, Cavan D, 
Shaw JE, Makaroff LE. IDF Diabetes Atlas: Global estimates for the prevalence of diabetes for 2015 and 
2040. Diabetes research and clinical practice. 2017 Jun 1; 128:40-50. 

47. Cho N, Shaw JE, Karuranga S, Huang Y, da Rocha Fernandes JD, Ohlrogge AW, Malanda B. IDF 
Diabetes Atlas: Global estimates of diabetes prevalence for 2017 and projections for 2045. Diabetes 
research and clinical practice. 2018 Apr 1; 138:271-81. 

48. Huang Y, Karuranga S, Malanda B, Williams DR. Call for data contribution to the IDF Diabetes Atlas 
9th Edition 2019. Diabetes research and clinical practice. 2018 Jun 1; 140:351-2. 

49. Anjana RM, Deepa M, Pradeepa R, Mahanta J, Narain K, Das HK, Adhikari P, Rao PV, Saboo B, 
Kumar A, Bhansali A. Prevalence of diabetes and prediabetes in 15 states of India: results from the 
ICMR–INDIAB population-based cross-sectional study. The lancet Diabetes & endocrinology. 2017 
Aug 1; 5(8):585-96. 

50. Anjana RM, Rani CS, Deepa M, Pradeepa R, Sudha V, Nair HD, Lakshmipriya N, Subhashini S, Binu 
VS, Unnikrishnan R, Mohan V. Incidence of diabetes and prediabetes and predictors of progression 
among Asian Indians: 10-year follow-up of the Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology Study (CURES). 
Diabetes care. 2015 Aug 1; 38(8):1441-8. 

51. Pradeepa R, Anjana RM, Joshi SR, Bhansali A, Deepa M, Joshi PP, Dhandania VK, Madhu SV, Rao 
PV, Geetha L, Subashini R. Prevalence of generalized & abdominal obesity in urban & rural India-the 
ICMR-INDIAB Study (Phase-I)[ICMR-INDIAB-3]. The Indian journal of medical research. 2015 Aug; 
142(2):139. 

52. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Government of India, UNICEF and Population 
Council. 2019. Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS) National Report. New Delhi. 
Available from https://nhm.gov.in/WriteReadData/l892s/1405796031571201348.pdf. 

53. World Health Organization. Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint 
WHO/FAO expert consultation. World Health Organization; 2003 Apr 22. Available from: 
https://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/publications/trs916/en/. 

132 
 



54. National Sample Survey Office. Nutritional Intake in India, 2011-12. 560, NSS 68th Round. National 
Statistical Organization, Government of India. New Delhi, India. 2014. 

55. Te Morenga L, Mallard S, Mann J. Dietary sugars and body weight: systematic review and meta-
analyses of randomised controlled trials and cohort studies. BMJ. 2013 Jan 15; 346:e7492. 

56.  Moynihan PJ, Kelly SA. Effect on caries of restricting sugars intake: systematic review to inform WHO 
guidelines. Journal of dental research. 2014 Jan; 93(1):8-18. 

57. Greenwood DC, Threapleton DE, Evans CE, Cleghorn CL, Nykjaer C, Woodhead C, Burley VJ. 
Association between sugar-sweetened and artificially sweetened soft drinks and type 2 diabetes: 
systematic review and dose–response meta-analysis of prospective studies. British Journal of Nutrition. 
2014 Sep; 112(5):725-34. 

58. Wells JC, Pomeroy E, Walimbe SR, Popkin BM, Yajnik CS. The elevated susceptibility to diabetes in 
India: an evolutionary perspective. Frontiers in public health. 2016 Jul 7; 4:145. 

59. Brouns F, Bjorck I, Frayn KN, Gibbs AL, Lang V, Slama G, Wolever TM. Glycaemic index 
methodology. Nutrition research reviews. 2005 Jun; 18(1):145-71. 

60. Brand-Miller J, Foster-Powell K, Holt S. The New Glucose Revolution Complete Guide to Glycemic 
Index Values. Marlowe; 2003.  

61. International Standards Organisation. Food products–Determination of the glycaemic index (GI) and 
recommendation for food classification. 

62. Venn BJ, Green TJ. Glycemic index and glycemic load: measurement issues and their effect on diet–
disease relationships. European journal of clinical nutrition. 2007 Dec; 61(1):S122-31. 

63. Wolever TM, Jenkins DJ. The use of the glycemic index in predicting the blood glucose response to 
mixed meals. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1986 Jan 1; 43(1):167-72. 

64. Salmerón J, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, Colditz GA, Spiegelman D, Jenkins DJ, Stampfer MJ, Wing AL, 
Willett WC. Dietary fiber, glycemic load, and risk of NIDDM in men. Diabetes care. 1997 Apr 1; 
20(4):545-50. 

65. Foster-Powell K, Holt SH, Brand-Miller JC. International table of glycemic index and glycemic load 
values: 2002. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2002 Jul 1; 76(1):5-6. 

66. Atkinson FS, Foster-Powell K, Brand-Miller JC. International tables of glycemic index and glycemic 
load values: 2008. Diabetes care. 2008 Dec 1; 31(12):2281-3. 

67. Wolever TM. The glycemic index. World review of nutrition and dietetics. 1990; 62:120-85. 

68. Suzuki H, Fukushima M, Okamoto S, Takahashi O, Shimbo T, Kurose T, Yamada Y, Inagaki N, Seino 
Y, Fukui T. Effects of thorough mastication on postprandial plasma glucose concentrations in non-obese 
Japanese subjects. Metabolism. 2005 Dec 1; 54(12):1593-9. 

69. Henry CJ, Lightowler HJ, Kendall FL, Storey M. The impact of the addition of toppings/fillings on the 
glycaemic response to commonly consumed carbohydrate foods. European journal of clinical nutrition. 
2006 Jun; 60(6):763-9. 

70. Nuttall FQ, Mooradian AD, Gannon MC, Billington C, Krezowski P. Effect of protein ingestion on the 
glucose and insulin response to a standardized oral glucose load. Diabetes care. 1984 Sep 1; 7(5):465-70. 

71. Collier G, O'Dea K. The effect of coingestion of fat on the glucose, insulin, and gastric inhibitory 
polypeptide responses to carbohydrate and protein. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1983 Jun 
1; 37(6):941-4. 

72. Sugiyama M, Tang AC, Wakaki Y, Koyama W. Glycemic index of single and mixed meal foods among 
common Japanese foods with white rice as a reference food. European journal of clinical nutrition. 2003 
Jun; 57(6):743-52. 

73. Freeman J. The glycemic index debate: does the type of carbohydrate really matter? Diabetes forecast. 
2005; 58: 11. 

133 
 



74. Jakobsen MU, Dethlefsen C, Joensen AM, Stegger J, Tjønneland A, Schmidt EB, Overvad K. Intake of 
carbohydrates compared with intake of saturated fatty acids and risk of myocardial infarction: 
importance of the glycemic index. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2010 Jun 1; 91(6):1764-8. 

75. Oba S, Nanri A, Kurotani K, Goto A, Kato M, Mizoue T, Noda M, Inoue M, Tsugane S, Japan Public 
Health Center-based Prospective Study Group. Dietary glycemic index, glycemic load and incidence of 
type 2 diabetes in Japanese men and women: the Japan Public Health Center-based Prospective Study. 
Nutrition journal. 2013 Dec 1; 12(1):165. 

76. Jenkins DJ, Kendall CW, Augustin LS, Franceschi S, Hamidi M, Marchie A, Jenkins AL, Axelsen M. 
Glycemic index: overview of implications in health and disease. The American journal of clinical 
nutrition. 2002 Jul 1; 76(1):266S-73S. 

77. Greenwood DC, Threapleton DE, Evans CE, Cleghorn CL, Nykjaer C, Woodhead C, Burley VJ. 
Glycemic index, glycemic load, carbohydrates, and type 2 diabetes: systematic review and dose–
response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Diabetes care. 2013 Dec 1; 36(12):4166-71 

134 
 



8.  MINERALS 
 
 
8.1. CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS 
 

The requirements of calcium (Ca) and phosphorus are considered together as their function 
and requirements are closely linked.  Once the requirements of calcium are assessed, it would be 
easier to fix the requirements of phosphorus. Calcium is a major element in the body and an adult 
man of 60 kg has nearly 1 kg of Ca, most of which is present in the bone. An important body 
function of Ca lies in the formation of the bone. Though small in quantity, non-skeletal Ca has the 
other important functions like neuromuscular excitation, blood coagulation, membrane 
permeability and others. Importance of Ca in these functions is reflected in the precision with 
which plasma Ca level is regulated.  Calcium in bone plays a role in maintaining blood level even 
in the face of dietary Ca inadequacy. Blood calcium level is maintained within narrow limits by 
the interplay of vitamin D and several hormones, like parathyroid hormone (PTH), thyrocalcitonin, 
cortisol and gender steroids by controlling absorption, excretion and bone turnover. 

Calcium is required by an adult man for replacing Ca lost from the body through stools, 
urine, bile and sweat.  The endogenous fecal losses are estimated to be about 1.4 mg/kg in children, 
while it is about 2.1 mg/kg in adults. Urinary losses are roughly 40 mg in childhood reaching 80 
mg before puberty and tapering down to 40 mg in adults, while median sweat losses have been 
estimated at 35 mg per m2 body surface area1. About 20-50% of Ca in the diet is absorbed and 
such absorption is greatly facilitated by vitamin D. Additional Ca is required during growth for 
skeletal development and during lactation for the calcium secretion in breast milk. 
 

8.1.1. Dietary calcium intake 

 Calcium intake is fairly high, being in the range of 1 g or more a day in communities that 
consume plenty of milk as in the West, milk being a rich source of calcium. However, in 
developing countries where 
milk intake is low, most dietary Figure 8.1.1: Calcium intakes (mg) per consumption unit 
calcium comes from cereals. (CU) in Urban (red bars) and Rural (blue bars) India 
Since these are only a moderate (Source: Ref 2 & 3) 
source, the daily intake of Ca in  
such communities is in a low 600
range of 300-600 mg a day. 
Based on NNMB (Urban 2016 500

and Rural 2012) data, the 400
median milk consumption in 
Urban and Rural India is 122 300

ml/Consumption Unit (CU) 200
and 85 ml/CU respecttively2,3. 
Calcium intakes from the same 100

data, show intakes of 402 0
mg/CU (Urban) and 331 
mg/CU (Rural) (Figure 8.1.1). 
Other rich sources of Ca among 
plant foods are the millet ragi 
(Eleusine coracana), the  
pseudo cereal, rajkeera 
(Amaranthus) and the green leafy vegetables.  
 

135 
 

Calcium intake (mg/CU)



8.1.2. Calcium requirement 

Calcium requirement has been measured by long-term balance studies. Such studies among 
the Western population, whose habitual diets contain high levels of Ca from generous amounts of 
milk, have indicated a requirement of Ca of the order of 1 g/day. Population groups in many 
developing countries subsist on a much lower calcium intake of about 500 mg without any ill 
effects. Long-term balance studies in such populations indicate that they are in positive Ca balance 
even on much lower intakes. This is because the body can adapt to different levels of intakes of 
Ca and maintain a positive Ca balance. These observations were the basis for the RDAs for Ca 
suggested by the two previous RDA Committees in 2010 and 19904,5. These recommendations 
were supported by the review of Nordin, who presented evidence resolving the paradox of low 
fracture rates associated with low calcium intakes in developing world against the higher fracture 
rates in the developed world with higher Ca intake6. The dramatic differences in the dietary levels 
of both animal protein and sodium, known to limit calcium loss in urine, were shown to be mainly 
responsible for the pronounced differences in calcium requirements. It was estimated that a 
reduction in animal protein from 60g to 20g or sodium from 150 to 50 m mol/d could decrease 
calcium requirement by about 200 mg/d; a combination of both could be additive, accounting to 
differences upto 400 mg. Such observations were also endorsed by the 1997 IOM Committee7 and 
WHO Expert Group8. In fact, WHO Expert group presented a different set of recommendations 
of estimated calcium intakes for population from less developed countries subsisting on low levels 
of animal protein in the diets along with those recommended for population from developed 
countries (Annexure 8.1).  

However, recent epidemiological studies indicate that the net effect of protein on bone 
turnover is slightly positive, and therefore have a protective effect1. Several observational and 
clinical studies have examined the effect of high-protein diets on bone1. Over a 4-year period in 
the Framingham Osteoporosis Study, a higher protein intake (84 to 152 g/day), was positively 
associated with change in femoral neck and spine BMD1. Other factors that influence calcium 
absorption include sodium and potassium in the diet. High intakes of sodium increase urinary 
calcium excretion. In contrast, adding more potassium to a high-sodium diet might help decrease 
calcium excretion, particularly in postmenopausal women7. 

Three major approaches are commonly employed in arriving at the requirements of calcium:  

1.  Calcium balance studies on subjects consuming variable amounts of calcium. 

2.  A factorial model using calcium accretion based on bone mineral accretion data obtained 
isotopically or by scanning. 

3. Clinical trials investigating the response of change in calcium balance or bone mineral 
content/density or fracture rate to varying calcium intakes. 

All the three approaches finally seek to arrive at requirements as the minimum amount of 
calcium needed to accrue enough bone mineral content for good bone health (during growth) and 
bone integrity or compensate the losses or extra demands to maintain the desired level of bone 
mineral content and bone integrity. With the advent of Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry 
(DEXA), estimation of desirable retention of calcium in a dose-dependent, non-invasive manner 
over a long period at multiple time-points has become possible. Whole body mineral content and 
density (also multiple bone sites at risk) along with body composition could be examined using 
DEXA. There have been many studies on populations from developing countries, fully exploiting 
the advantages of DEXA measurements and transforming it into a powerful tool of bone health. 
However, such studies are few in Indian population. A recent multi-centric study supported by 
ICMR has generated large database on bone health of Indian population using DEXA for the first 
time and are discussed below. 

136 
 



Adults  

As indicated above, based on the observations that the body can adapt to different levels of 
intakes of Ca and maintain a positive Ca balance even at 400 mg dietary calcium intake (RDA 
committee 1990)5 suggested a lower level of calcium intake. On the other hand, there is evidence 
of widespread Ca depletion as indicated by bone density measurements, particularly in women 
after repeated episodes of pregnancy and lactation. The strong adaptation to a chronic low-level 
consumption of calcium seems to be resulting in compromises in stature and restriction in the 
function of the skeletal system. The fracture rate at the neck of the femur was shown to occur 12-
15 years earlier in women from low income group as compared to that in high income group9. 
There have been reports of moderately higher levels of circulating parathyroid hormone in Indians 
suggesting strains on calcium economy10.   

Attaining peak bone densities is essential to prevent osteoporotic fractures in later life. Also 
attaining optimal accretion rate of bone mass during puberty is critical for optimum body size and 
skeletal maturity11.12. There is concern that women from low income group are exposed to a greater 
risk of developing bone abnormalities due to poor nutrition and their occupational or non-
occupational activity13 aggravating the situation. Current level of consumption providing less than 
400 mg Ca/ d/ CU is not able to protect them from poor bone health and some segments of the 
population exhibit bone density (spinal) z-scores described as osteoporotic. The previous 
Committee in 2010, in view of the balance studies and ICMR multi centric study data as indicated 
above, chose the upper value of calcium requirements for adults (600 mg/d). This was based on 
reevaluation of all the calcium balance studies carried out on Indian adults published earlier14-18.  

Annexure 8.2 denotes that the Indian adult achieves zero retention at an intake of 334 mg 
and for retaining 40 mg/d of calcium to adjust for the insensitive losses, the calculated intake will 
be 480 mg/d. Considering the +2SD (as 25%), the allowance was calculated to 600 mg/d 
(Annexure 8.1). However, it is important to note that the calcium zero retention set at 334 mg for 
men, by the previous committee, is much lower than other countries. For example, IOM has set 
EAR of 800 mg based on Hunt and Johnson study in 200719, where the calcium zero retention was 
741 mg. There is a further uncertainty as to the true retention rates as there is a wide variability 
seen from various countries such as china, where zero retention rate has been reported to be 400 
mg, Japanese have reported 600 mg and WHO/FAO at 540 mg20. 

 

A review of the available ICMR multi-centric studies on bone health in Indian men and 
women is appropriate here21. These studies were carried out in two parts: the first, with the 
objective of establishing BMD reference values for males and females using DXA. Data on whole 
body bone mineral content (WBBMC) were obtained in 400 healthy men and women drawn from 
upper income group with a BMI ranging between 16.5- 25.0 and with an intake of calcium around 
1g/d. The results are shown in Table 8.1.1 and Figure 8.1.2. 

 

The results show that WBBMD at all sites was significantly lower than Hologic standards21. 
The z scores of bone density are much lesser than those of Hologic Standards, despite the Ca 
intakes recording at about 1g. Factors other than calcium intake seem to determine the peak bone 
content and density. It is interesting to note, while there was an upward trend in WB BMC in 
healthy men, no such trend was observed in women, where the calcium requirements are more 
important (Figure 8.1.2). Further, the slope was highest from below 600 to 600-800 ranges in men 
and 600-800 and 800-1000 ranges in women, suggesting the intakes of 800-1000 mg may be 
reasonably adequate for this population. Further, a calcium intake was not a determinant of bone 
density in this population, unlike Vitamin D, which was shown to be positively associated with 
bone density21.  
  

137 
 



Table 8.1.1: DEXA indicators of bone health in reference groups 
 

  Male Female Pooled 

N 404 405 809 

Body Mass Index (kg/m2) Mean 22.5 21.8 22.1 

SD 2.2 2.2 2.2 

N 404 405 809 

Age in completed years Mean 24.8 24.4 24.6 

SD 2.7 2.8 2.8 

N 400 404 804 

Average calcium intake (mg/day) Mean 1150 1012 1081 

SD 553 437 502 

N 263 266 529 

Whole body BMD (g/cm2) Mean 1.13 1.10 1.11 

SD 0.08 0.08 0.09 

N 404 405 809 
Hip BMD (g/cm2) Mean 0.96 0.89 0.93 

SD 0.19 0.15 0.18 
N 404 405 809 

Forearm BMD (g/cm2) Mean 0.60 0.53 0.56 
SD 0.08 0.09 0.09 
N 404 405 809 

Spine BMD (g/cm2) Mean 0.95 0.93 0.94 

SD 0.19 0.17 0.18 
 

 

Figure 8.1.2: Mean WBBMC among healthy men and women aged 20 to 30 years    
(Source: Ref 21) 

 

2400

2300

2200

2100 Male

Female
2000

1900

1800
< 600 600-800 800-1000 >= 1000

 
 

 
The second part of the ICMR multi-centric studies was aimed at estimating the prevalence 

of osteopenia (rarefaction of bone to less than 1 z score and osteoporosis (to less than 2 z score) 
in Indian population aged between 30-70+ y (about 750 each of males and females) drawn from 
the three different socioeconomic backgrounds. The data on WB BMC was not available at all 
centers and further analysis could not be done.  

138 
 

Whole body BMC (g)



However, the data from ICMR-NIN was available and are reported. The results indicated 
that with decreasing income of the groups, there was graded decrease not only in anthropometry 
and BMI, but also in bone mineral content and calcium intake (mean intakes were 933, 606 and 
320 mg/d). Parallel to a decrease in the calcium intake, bone densities were also lower with a 
decreasing income. Those above 50 years suffered from much worse bone densities than those 
less than 50 years in the same group.  

 
In order to further extract information in relation to requirements, all the pooled data was 

subdivided into quartiles of calcium intake and compared for various bone-related indicators 
(Table 8.1.2).  

 

Table 8.1.2: Whole body bone mineral content (WBBMC) controlled for BMI                   
according to quartiles of calcium intake in adult Indian men and women 

 

Men Women 
Quartiles 

Diet Ca WBBMC * Diet Ca WBBMC* 
mg/d g mg/d g 

1st <344 2088 ± 22a <326 1611 ± 20a 

2nd 344-581 2137 ± 21ab 326-540 1675 ± 19b 

3rd 581-872 2171 ± 21b 540-811 1730 ± 20c 

4th >872 2250 ± 22c >811 1848 ± 20d 

 
* The values are expressed as mean±SE. The WBBMC values carrying different 
superscripts were significantly different in women and men (p<0.01).  

 

Here too, there is a graded lowering in bone mineral content in tune with lowering range of 
intakes of calcium even after adjustment for BMI changes.  It could have been more useful if the 
bone mineral content above a threshold quantity was shown functionally relevant to fix the 
requirement. In fact, though the pooled data show statistically significant correlation between Ca 
intake and TBBMC, the R2 values of 0.15 and 0.125 in males and females, respectively, show poor 
predictability of BMC content from the intake of calcium. These data on bone health status using 
DXA in Indian population suggest that an intake of 800 mg calcium/d is associated with better 
bone health status.  

 

Unlike the past, recently there is a significant increase in the consumption of milk and milk 
products raising the level of calcium intake, though not enough to meet the requirements given for 
RDA (WB-BMC) compared to other developed countries. Based on the dietary intake versus bone 
density projections from ICMR multi-centric data, an adequate calcium intake of 800 to 1000 
mg/day for adults appears to be required for optimal bone health among healthy adults.The current 
committee based on the evidence from balance studies and bone density studies has considered an 
EAR of 800 mg for the adult population. Adding 25% CV, RDA has been set at 1000 mg for adult 
males and females. 

 

Post-menopausal women 
 

It is well documented that menopause is accompanied by a sustained rise in obligatory 
urinary calcium of about 30 mg daily. According to FAO/WHO8, calcium absorption certainly 
does not increase at this time - and probably decreases; this extra urinary calcium leads to a 
negative calcium balance. There is a consensus that these events are associated with an increase 

139 
 



in bone resorption but controversy continues over whether this is the primary event, or is a 
response to an increased calcium demand, or both. A published review on calcium nutrition and 
osteoporosis is available in Indian females22. The authors cite a study carried out in two groups of 
women aged 20-90 years, with median intakes of calcium of 800 (with lifetime milk consumption) 
or 480 mg/d (who consumed no milk or less), in whom BMD was measured. The group with 
higher intake of calcium entered osteoporotic and fracture zones of bone density 10 years later 
than those with lower intake. In addition, women engaged in hard work and those with lifetime 
vegetarian habit are stated to be at reduced risk of osteoporosis.  

 

Studies on the 3 socio economic groups at NIN show that even after the age of 50 years, the 
extent of osteoporosis in the spine is only 16% in the HIG group (with higher calcium intakes of 
around 1 g) compared to the LIG group with 65% osteoporosis (calcium intakes around 400mg). 
However, it is logical to recommend sufficient additional calcium (+200mg/d) proportionate to 
what is recommended by FAO/WHO after menopause to cover at least the extra obligatory loss 
of 30 mg/d calcium in the urine. Therefore, an additional allowance of 200 mg has been added to 
the EAR and the RDA has been set at 1200 mg for post-menopausal women. 

 

Pregnant and lactating women 
 

 IOM suggests no additional requirements for pregnant women, lactating women, provided 
the intakes are sufficient for healthy adults1. However, in a study conducted at NIN (Kulkarni et 
al 2020, unpublished), provision of calcium supplementation of 750 mg to a baseline intakes of 
400 to 500 mg improved bone density in this low-income group. Hence, an additional amount of 
200 mg has been added to 800 and a total of 1000mg has been set as EAR and adding 10% CV, 
the RDA is set at 1200mg for lactating women. This is also in line with previous recommendation 
(ICMR RDA – 2010).  

 
Evidence suggests that there is an increase in absorption of calcium, especially in women 

consuming less than 1200 mg Ca/d. Hypercalciuria is often present during normal pregnancy as a 
consequence of the doubling of intestinal calcium absorption that occurs, and pregnancy itself 
increases the risk of kidney stones1. Studies on effects of calcium intakes are lacking in pregnant 
women. However, studies in adolescent girls suggest that that calcium intake of 1,500 to 1,700 
mg/day do not interfere with iron or zinc absorption in adolescent girls. However, as calcium 
intakes among this age group could be higher than those studied, there is little evidence to shed 
light on the larger issue1. 

Infants and young children 

For infants, AI has been set at 300 mg based on breast milk intake and calcium content, 
which is lower than the previous recommendations of 500 mg set as RDA. The IOM data was 
used, as children for the first 2 years are expected to grow at same level, given the right 
environment as observed from WHO multi-centric study1. IOM review of studies have shown 
mean intake of 780 ml milk for the first six months, and an average of 264 mg of calcium content 
in 100 ml of breast milk have been reported. The total intake of calcium comes to 210 mg of 
calcium for 0-6 months, which has been the AI recommended by IOM in this age group. Similarly, 
for infants 6-12 months, with a mean intake of 600 ml breast milk and taking the calcium content 
as 210 mg in 100 ml would give 130 mg of calcium from breast milk in this age group. Adding 
140 mg of calcium from solid foods based on studies on infants fed formula feeds; the calcium 
needed in this age group would be 270 mg of calcium. With mean intakes of breast milk at 700 ml 
for first six months and 600 ml for the next six months in Indian population, the recommended AI 
of 300 mg for the current one will be enough to meet the requirements of both age groups of 
Infants.  

140 
 



Children and adolescents 

Cross sectional data given on WB-BMC in healthy boys and girls aged 5 to 17 years23 were 
used to calculate retention rates per year and calcium accretion per day was calculated based on 
the assumption that 32.3% of bone is calcium1. Information available from clinical trials in which 
additional calcium was given and balance studies in children were used to confirm the 
requirements in children and are explained below. 

Calcium balance studies (short-term) reported were on children, mainly of 3-11 years of the 
pre-pubertal age24-26. Two unpublished balance studies on children aged 3-7 years (n= 3 or 4) were 
used to derive the retention rates by the previous committee. The levels of calcium studied were 
76, 174, 450 and 610mg/d with energy intake varying between 945-1300 kcal/d. For comparison, 
the mean values of the earlier balance studies and the individual values of the most recent studies 
were considered. While balance studies after long-term consumption at each given level are best 
suited for fixing requirements, validity of short-term balance data can be enhanced by covering 
wide range of intakes even with less number of observations. The strength of the estimate will be 
determined by the best fit of the data independently collected over time to a set model. Almost 
linear relationships between the intake, excretion and retention provide a strong basis for the 
current recommendations. These data are presented in Annexure 8.3. 

The data were used to generate two types of information as is evident from the figures in 
Annexure 8.3. All the pooled data of individuals as well as that for means appeared to be 
homogenous with high correlation coefficients and all the data on means also showed the same 
characteristics (values of r, slopes and intercepts). The means were used to obtain intra-class 
coefficient. The resulting regression equations were used to derive the level of calcium intake at 
which, 0 retention is obtained or the line can be extrapolated to obtain the excretion at 0 intake, 
which is a reflection of obligatory loss. Both these estimates were utilized to obtain calcium 
requirements at pre-pubertal age.  
 

Where intake (X) and retention (Y) were related: Y = -78.5 + 0.44 X 
 

At an intake of 200 mg, there was 0 mg retention as total losses are equal to the intake. Based 
on the data available on healthy children, the previous committee used IOM7value on bone 
accretion rates for children to be 125-130 mg at the minimum level. Considering a retention value 
of 125 mg for full longitudinal bone growth, using the above equation, the intakes required are 
462 mg of calcium and considering about 30mg/d for sweat losses at 40% absorption, the intakes 
needed are 540 mg per day (EAR) and taking mean+2SD level (2 X12.5%= 25%), the total 
calcium needed for RDA to meet requirement is 700 mg. This level of intake would ensure the 
requirements of calcium for most of the pre-pubertal population27.  

 

Unfortunately, there are no calcium balance data on pubertal boys or girls from India. 
However, there has been at least one comprehensive, randomized, placebo controlled clinical trial 
on middle-income, semi-urban Indian schoolchildren wherein bone mineral content and densities 
were measured in the whole body and at four sites using DEXA over 14 months of 
supplementation28. The children habitually received 745 mg calcium in the diets; the placebo 
controls received 920 mg (through milk vehicle) and the supplemented group 1145 mg calcium 
every day for 14 months (Table 8.1.3). There was a significant improvement in the calcium status 
and total bone mineral content in adolescents. The bone mineral accretion data are presented in 
Tables 8.1.3 and 8.1.4. Increments in bone mineral content are available at two levels of calcium 
intake in addition to that at the habitual intake at the start. An attempt was therefore made to 
compare their intakes and bone accretion in two sub-age groups. The design and composition of 
the groups did not permit segregation of data for boys and girls. A plot of the bone mineral content 

141 
 



with age shows that it increases with age in two phases: one slower phase below 11 years and the 
other steeper phase between 12-15 years (Annexure 8.4). An attempt was also made, therefore, to 
calculate mean increase in bone mineral content per day based on the estimated calcium intake 
from habitual basal diet + two supplements (placebo and supplement) into two broad age 
subgroups 7-11 and 12-16 years and compare the same with literature values (Tables 8.1.3 & 
8.1.4).    

 

Table 8.1.3: The bone changes in calcium treated vs. placebo groups in           
randomized, controlled trials in adolescents 

 

Group Mean Differences 

Source 
No. Age (y) 

(Ref) 

29 Total and Lumbar 
94 11.9 ± 0.5 F 18 960 1,314 13.32 

 10 

27 Total and Lumbar 
48 9–13 F 12 728 1,200 35.52 

 7-10 

7-16 / F/ Femur neck 
28 122 14 745 1145 22.00 

11.5 M 11 

Total body 
30 82 12.5±0.3 F 18 600 1125 37.0 

11 

31 149 7.9±0.1 F 12 <880 +850 - Many sites density 

 
It is striking that the results obtained are in conformity with the literature values on velocity 

of peak bone formation and the requirements of calcium worked out earlier in pre-pubertal 
children. They are substantially lower than those during pubertal peak velocity (Tables 8.1.3 and 
8.1.4). An intake of 921 mg/d in the total group works out to about 980 mg calcium per day in the 
pubertal group (>10 y group) and is sufficient to accrue a mean 390 mg mineral in the pubertal 
group (Table 8.1.3). Similarly, the diet was providing about 850 mg calcium/d in the pre-pubertal 
sub-group, which was sufficient to accumulate 240 mg of bone mineral content per day. The 
figures of calcium retention obtained are compared with the requirements suggested for optimum 
growth of US children (Tables 8.1.3 –8.1.5).  

 
It is well known that the calcium balance and retention both for maintenance and growth are 

mostly dependent on: race; geographical location; intake level of animal protein; body status of 
sodium and vitamin D; and of intake of calcium. In general, populations from developing countries 
are at calcium equilibrium at much lower intakes of calcium and are less prone to calcium 
deficiency8 than those in developed countries. Even in the case of adolescents, the cross-sectional 
increase in bone calcium and the longitudinal increment were much lower than those noted in 
children from developed Western countries (Tables 8.1.3 and 8.1.4). The Expert Committee of 
WHO warned that calcium requirements determined for populations of developed countries 
cannot be extrapolated to those in developing countries. At the levels of calcium intake far above 

142 
 

Gender 

Length of Study (m) 

Calcium Intake 
Controls (mg/day) 

Calcium Intake 
Treatment (mg/day) 

Total 
BMC (g) 

Change in 
BMD (%) 



habitual and requirement levels of 650 and 800 mg/d, the mineral laid was no better or only 
marginally better in both subgroups of children justifying the RDA suggested (Table 8.1.). It may 
also be noted that with increasing intake, the calculated net absorption also decreased in children 
(Table 8.1.6).  

 

Table 8.1.4: Calcium accretion rates in Indian children (pre-adolescent and                   
adolescent) at different levels of calcium intake 

 

Ca requirement= 
bone Ca + integ  

Age group/ 30-40 mg/d +Obl 
Treatment 

Sub-group Urine 40-50 mg/d. 
(calculated 

absorption, %) 

Habitual 660 85 233   (77) 147  (22.2) 
Sub-group 

Mean Placebo 850 101 240   (80) 150  (17.6) 
(7-11 y) 

Supplement 1060 125 298   (99) 170   (16.0) 

Habitual 830 161 440 (140) 230  (27.7) 
Sub-group 

Mean Placebo 980 164 390 (130) 220  (22.4) 
(11-15y) 

Supplement 1230 184 438 (146) 236   (19.2) 

Habitual 745 123 337 (112) 192  (25.8) 

Group Mean 
Placebo 920 133 315  (105) 185   (20.1) 

(10 y) 

Supplement 1145 155 368  (123) 203   (17.7) 

 
Supplement = Supplemented with calcium and other micronutrients. Whole body bone mineral 
content was determined at the start and after 14 months supplementation and average increments 
were used28. Plotting of bone mineral content of children at the beginning of the study on habitual 
intakes of calcium with the age and the slope provided estimate of annual increment in the 
corresponding group. Assuming 25% dietary calcium absorption, an intake of 800 mg is adequate 
to provide these retentions.  

 
Taking in view of all the above evidence, the current committee has used bone accretion 

rates for healthy population (Table 8.1.6) and have used factorial approach to derive EAR and 
RDA for all age groups with RDA ranging from 550 mg in children 4 to 6 years and 1050 mg for 
children aged 16-18 years based on healthy reference Indian children data23. A similar approach 
was used for children aged 1-3 years with a calcium accretion rates of 75 grams derived from 
longitudinal data from normal birth weight children (NIN unpublished study, Kulkarni B et al).  

143 
 

Dietary Ca mg/d 

Increment in bone mineral 
content 

Mean incremental  mineral 
mass (calcium) mg/d 



Table 8.1.5: Calcium accretion rates in adolescents 
 

Ca Absorp-
Source Age Ca intake 

Type of study retention tion 
(Ref) (Years) (mg/d) 

(mg/d) (%) 
Gain in body and 292-421 

10-18   Male 500-700 
32 skeletal mass and 305-330 60 

Female 500-550 
Ca kinetics  

33 Stable isotope 5-12 907 130 28 
6-14 908   Placebo 

34 BMC, Suppl. 130  
 1612 Suppl. 

12-15  Boys 823- 282 
35 Balance studies  

Girls 2164 212 
11-14  Girls 494 38 

36 Stable isotope 1330 
19-31  Women 283 22 

11-14  Girls 791 326 
37,38 Balance 19-30  Women 1019 171  

12-15  Boys 700-2001 171 
8-14    Boys 1140 359 36.5 

39 DEXA Velocity 
Girls 1113 284 29.6 

 

 
Table 8.1.6: Whole Body Bone mineral content (WB-BMC) in healthy boys                          

and girls aged 5 to 17 years. (Source: Ref 23) 
 

 Male Female Male Female 
Increment Increment Calcium Calcium 

BMC BMC 
Age per year per year accretion/day accretion per day 

(g) (g) 
(g) (g) (mg) (mg) 

5+ 584  566    
6+ 678 94 664 98 83 87 
7+ 794 116 766 102 103 90 
8+ 913 119 881 115 105 102 
9+ 945 32 947 66 28 58 
10+ 1061 116 1122 175 103 155 
11+ 1170 109 1314 192 96 170 
12+ 1380 210 1496 182 186 161 
13+ 1641 261 1660 164 231 145 
14+ 1690 49 1780 120 43 106 
15+ 1832 142 1839 59 126 52 
16+ 2174 342 1862 23 303 20 
17+ 2325 151 1968 106 134 94 

 
Fecal endogenous losses were taken at 1.4 mg/kg in children and the total fecal losses were 

estimated using the average body weights of WHO growth standards for boys and girls. Urinary 
excretion was taken at 40 mg in all age groups as done by previous committee. Sweat losses was 
taken at 30 mg in all age groups as done by previous committee. Absorption was taken at 40% for 
all age groups as done by previous committee (ICMR RDA 2010). CV was set at 12.5% and for 2 
SD at 25% while the previous committee set 2 SD at various ranges (25-30%). The details of 
deriving the same are provided in Annexure 5. 

 

144 
 



Table 8.1.7: EAR and RDA of calcium for various physiological groups 
 

ICMR  2020 
Age Group Category (mg/day) 

EAR RDA 

Men >18 y 800 1000 

Women (NPNL) >18 y 800 1000 

Pregnant women  800 1000 

Lactating women  1000 1200 
Post-menopausal 

 1000 1200 
women 

Infants 0-6 m 
- 300 (AI) 

6-12m 

Children 1-3y 400 500 

Children 4-6y 450 550 

Children 7-9 y 500 650 

Boys 10-12y 650 850 

Girls 10-12y 650 850 

Boys 13-15y 800 1000 

Girls 13-15y 800 1000 

Boys 16-18y 850 1050 

Girls 16-18y 850 1050 
 
Tolerable Upper limit (TUL) for calcium 
 

The ICMR committee report on TUL has been used to fix the TUL by the present 
committee40. The TUL committee looked into various studies in India, and observed that the 
values recommended by IOM are similar, except for in one study, where an intake of 2100 mg/day 
resulted in hypercalciuria in 9% of participants and hypercalcemia in 11% of participants. 
Nevertheless, the committee recommended a TUL of 2500 mg as the upper limit for adults.  The 
TUL committee considered that only few studies on calcium supplementation have reported 
adverse events and no studies with long term follow up. The TUL committee suggested that high 
oxalate foods in plant-based diets might also increase the risk of nephrolithiasis. Further, high 
calcium intakes might also interfere with absorption of iron and zinc and may exacerbate their 
deficiency. For children aged 1-3 years, 1500 mg has been set as the TUL, beyond which, there is 
a risk of increased adverse effects in taking calcium. For children aged 4 to 9 years, a value of 
2500 mg has been set and TUL value for adolescents aged 9-17 years has been set at 3000 mg. 
For Adult men and women, a TUL of 2500 mg has been set. Similarly, for pregnant women and 
lactating women, TUL of 2500 mg has been set. 

 

Table 8.1.8: Tolerable upper limit (TUL) of calcium for various physiological groups  
 

 1-3 Pregnant and 
4-9 years 9-17 years Adults 

 years lactating women 
Calcium 

1500 2500 3000 2500 2500 
(mg/day) 

 

145 
 



8.1.3. Phosphorus Requirements 
 

The Committee also considered the desirable intake of phosphorus (P).  Since P deficiency 
is unlikely to occur on the types of diets consumed in India, ensuring an adequate P intake may 
not present a problem. The previous Committee (ICMR RDA 2010) suggested that an elemental 
Ca:P ratio of 1:1 may be maintained in most age groups, except in infancy, where the ratio 
suggested is 1:1.5. The present Committee too adopts the same recommendations and the 
phosphorus values are modified in tune with the calcium recommendations (to maintain the same 
ratios) (Table 8.1.9). 

 
Table 8.1.9: EAR and RDA of phosphorus for various physiological groups 

 

ICMR  2020 

Age Group Category (mg/day) 

EAR RDA 

Men >18 y 800 1000 

Women (NPNL) >18 y 800 1000 

Pregnant women  800 1000 

Lactating women  1000 1200 

Post-menopausal women  1000 1200 

Infants 0-6 m 
- 450 (AI) 

6-12m 

Children 1-3y 400 500 

Children 4-6y 450 550 

Children 7-9 y 500 650 

Boys 10-12y 650 850 

Girls 10-12y 650 850 

Boys 13-15y 800 1000 

Girls 13-15y 800 1000 

Boys 16-18y 850 1050 

Girls 16-18y 850 1050 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  

146 
 



References 
 

1. Del Valle HB, Yaktine AL, Taylor CL, Ross AC, editors. Dietary reference intakes for calcium and 
vitamin D. National Academies Press; 2011 Apr 30. 

2. NNMB, Report of Third Repeat Surveys (Rural). National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, National 
Institute of Nutrition (ICMR). Hyderabad, 1996-97. 

3. NNMB, Report of Urban Surveys. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, National Institute of 
Nutrition (ICMR). Hyderabad 2016. 

4. ICMR, Nutrient requirements and Recommended dietary allowances for Indians, A Report of the 
Expert Group of the National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), 2010. 

5. ICMR, Nutrient requirements and Recommended dietary allowances for Indians, A Report of the 
Expert Group of the National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR),  1990. 

6.  Nordin BC. Calcium requirement is a sliding scale. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2000 
Jun 1; 71(6):1381-3. 

7. Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Ca, Mg, Vitamin D and F. Food and Nutrition 
Board, USA, Washington DC, NA Press, 1997. 

8. Joint FAO/WHO. Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. A report of the joint 
FAO/WHO expert consultation, Bangkok, Thailand, 21-30 September 1998, Second Edition, 2004. 

9. Shatrugna V. Osteoporosis in the Asian region: newer questions. Diet, Nutrition and Chronic Diseases. 
1998:81-3. 

10. Sivakumar B, Krishnamachari KA. Circulating levels of immunoreactive parathyroid hormone in 
endemic genu valgum. Hormone and Metabolic Research. 1976; 8(04):317-9. 

11. Matkovic V, Jelic T, Wardlaw GM, Ilich JZ, Goel PK, Wright JK, Andon MB, Smith KT, Heaney RP. 
Timing of peak bone mass in Caucasian females and its implication for the prevention of osteoporosis. 
Inference from a cross-sectional model. The Journal of clinical investigation. 1994 Feb 1; 93(2):799-
808. 

12. Nieves JW, Golden AL, Siris E, Kelsey JL, Lindsay R. Teenage and current calcium intake are related 
to bone mineral density of the hip and forearm in women aged 30–39 years. American journal of 
epidemiology. 1995 Feb 15; 141(4):342-51. 

13. Shatrugna V, Kulkarni B, Kumar PA, Rani KU, Balakrishna N. Bone status of Indian women from a 
low-income group and its relationship to the nutritional status. Osteoporosis International. 2005 Dec 1; 
16(12):1827-35. 

14. Tandon GS, Teotia SP, Yadav SC, Garg SK. A study of calcium balance in normal individuals and 
postmenopausal state. Journal of the Indian Medical Association. 1973 Sep 1; 61(5):214. 

15. Nageswara RC, Narasinga RB. Absorption of calcium from calcium lactate and calcium sulphate by 
human subjects. The Indian journal of medical research. 1974 Mar; 62(3):426. 

16. Srikantia SG, Siddiqui AH. Metabolic studies in skeletal fluorosis. Clinical science. 1965; 28:477-85. 

17. Rao BN, Krishnamachari KA, Sarathy CV. 47 Ca turnover in endemic fluorosis and endemic genu 
valgum. British Journal of Nutrition. 1979 Jan; 41(1):7-14. 

18. Ahuja MM, Mohanan P. Calcium phosphorus and nitrogen balance studies in renal calculus disease. 
The Indian journal of medical research. 1970 Apr; 58(4):444. 

19. Hunt CD, Johnson LK. Calcium requirements: new estimations for men and women by cross-sectional 
statistical analyses of calcium balance data from metabolic studies. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 2007; 1054:63. 

20. Fang A, Li K, Shi H, He J, Li H. Calcium requirements for Chinese adults by cross-sectional statistical 
analyses of calcium balance studies: an individual participant data and aggregate data meta-regression. 

21. ICMR Taskforce study. Population based reference standards of peak bone mineral density of Indian 
males and females- An ICMR multi-centre task force study. Indian Council of Medical Research, New 
Delhi 2010. 

147 
 



22. Teotia SP, Teotia M. Nutritional bone disease: The continuing challenge to neonatal bone health. 
Postgrad Med. 2009; 23:30-8. 

23. Khadilkar AV, Sanwalka NJ, Chiplonkar SA, Khadilkar VV, Mughal MZ. Normative data and 
percentile curves for dual energy X-ray absorptiometry in healthy Indian girls and boys aged 5–17 
years. Bone. 2011 Apr 1; 48(4):810-9. 

24. Sivakumar B. Iron and Calcium balance studies from a special nutritional beverage in children. 
National Institute of Nutrition, Annual Report, 20-21, 1999-2000. 

25. Murthy HBN, Reddy SK, Swaminathan M and Subramanyan V.  The metabolism of Nitrogen, calcium 
and phosphorus in undernourished children. Brit J Nutr. 1955;9:203-215. 

26. Perera WD, Reddy V. Effect of vitamin D supplements on calcium absorption in children. Indian 
Journal of Medical Research. 1971; 59(6):961-4. 

27. Chan GM, Hoffman K, McMurry M. Effects of dairy products on bone and body composition in 
pubertal girls. The Journal of pediatrics. 1995 Apr 1; 126(4):551-6. 

28. Shatrugna V, Balakrishna N, Krishnaswamy K. Effect of micronutrient supplement on health and 
nutritional status of schoolchildren: bone health and body composition. Nutrition. 2006 Jan 1; 
22(1):S33-9. 

29. Lloyd T, Andon MB, Rollings N, Martel JK, Landis JR, Demers LM, Eggli DF, Kieselhorst K, Kulin 
HE. Calcium supplementation and bone mineral density in adolescent girls. Jama. 1993 Aug 18; 
270(7):841-4. 

30. Cadogan J, Eastell R, Jones N, Barker ME. Milk intake and bone mineral acquisition in adolescent 
girls: randomised, controlled intervention trial. Bmj. 1997 Nov 15; 315(7118):1255-60. 

31. Bonjour JP, Carrie AL, Ferrari S, Clavien H, Slosman D, Theintz G, Rizzoli R. Calcium-enriched foods 
and bone mass growth in prepubertal girls: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. The 
Journal of clinical investigation. 1997 Mar 15; 99 (6):1287-94. 

32. Rao BJ. Nutrient requirement of adolescents. InProc. Nutr. Soc. India 1985 (Vol. 31, pp. 41-62). 

33. Abrams SA, Copeland KC, Gunn SK, Gundberg CM, Klein KO, Ellis KJ. Calcium absorption, bone 
mass accumulation, and kinetics increase during early pubertal development in girls. The Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2000 May 1; 85(5):1805-9. 

34. Johnston Jr CC, Miller JZ, Slemenda CW, Reister TK, Hui S, Christian JC, Peacock M. Calcium 
supplementation and increases in bone mineral density in children. New England journal of medicine. 
1992 Jul 9; 327(2):82-7. 

35. Jackman LA, Millane SS, Martin BR, Wood OB, McCabe GP, Peacock M, Weaver CM. Calcium 
retention in relation to calcium intake and postmenarcheal age in adolescent females. The American 
journal of clinical nutrition. 1997 Aug 1; 66(2):327-33. 

36. Wastney ME, Ng J, Smith DB, Martin BR, Peacock M, Weaver CM. Differences in calcium kinetics 
between adolescent girls and young women. American Journal of Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative 
and Comparative Physiology. 1996 Jul 1; 271(1):R208-16. 

37. Weaver CM, Martin BR, Plawecki KL, Peacock M, Wood OB, Smith DL, Wastney ME. Differences 
in calcium metabolism between adolescent and adult females. The American journal of clinical 
nutrition. 1995 Mar 1; 61(3):577-81. 

38. Braun M, Martin BR, Kern M, McCabe GP, Peacock M, Jiang Z, Weaver CM. Calcium retention in 
adolescent boys on a range of controlled calcium intakes–. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 
2006 Aug 1; 84(2):414-8. 

39. Bailey DA, Martin AD, McKay HA, Whiting S, Mirwald R. Calcium accretion in girls and boys during 
puberty: a longitudinal analysis. Journal of bone and mineral research. 2000 Nov; 15(11):2245-50. 

40. Indian Council of Medical Research: To examine a) allowance of vitamins/minerals more than one 
RDA in health/dietary supplements and nutraceuticals and b) Safe Upper limits. A Report of the Expert 
Committee of the Indian Council of Medical Research, 2018. 

 

148 
 



Annexure 8.1 
                  
Calcium requirements recommended by FAO/WHO (2004),  

ICMR 1989 and ICMR 2010 
 

FAO/WHO 2004 

High protein Low protein ICMR, RDA ICMR, RDA 
Category intake, developed intake, less 1989 2010 

country developed country (mg/d) (mg/d) 

(mg/d) (mg/d) 

Infants 400 300* 500 500 

Children 400 
500 500 600 

1-3 y  

4-6 y 600 550 400 600 

7-9 y 700 700 400 600 

Adolescents 
1300 1000** 600 800 

10-18 y 

Adult females 1000 750 400 600 

Pregnant women 1200 800 1000 1200 

Lactating women 1000 750 1000 1200 

Post menopausal 
1300 800 NA 800 

women 

Adult men 
1000 750 400 600 

19-65 y 

Adult men 
1300 800 NA NA 

65+ y 
 

*  Human milk                           
 ** Particularly during growth spurt 

 
  

149 
 



Annexure 8.2 
 

Plot of mean values of calcium retention and intake in Indian adults 
                     

 
 
 150

 
 

100
 
 
 50

 
 0

 
 

-50
 
 
 -100

0 200 400 600 800 1000

 
Calcium intake (mg/d)

 
n=6, r= 0.9204; Y = -92.39 + 0.2765 X. 

 
 
 

Plot of total urinary and fecal calcium excretion and intake in Indian adults 
 

 
 
 800

 
700

 
 600

 
500

 
 400

 
300

 
 200

 
100

 
 0

 0 200 400 600 800 1000

 Calcum intake (mg/d)

 Series 1
Series 2

The obligatory loss obtained was 80 mg/d (r= 0.9945; Y = 79 + 0.765 X, compared to WHO equation: 
Col 1 vs Col 3: 107.69 

Y= 142+0.779X).  Col 1 vs Col 3: 415.38 

 Col 1 vs Col 3: 446.15 
Col 1 vs Col 3: 553.85 
Col 1 vs Col 3: 815.38  
Col 1 vs Col 3: 838.46  

 

150 
 

Calcium  excretion (mg/d) Calcium retention (mg/d)



Annexure 8.3 
 

 Plot of intake and excretion of Ca in adolescents 

 

500

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Intake of Ca mg/d

 
 
 
 
 Plot of intake and retention of Ca in adolescents 
 

 

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

-50 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800

-100

-150
 Intake of Ca mg/d

 
 
 
 
 

151 
 

Calcium  retention mg/d Fecal excretion mg/d



Annexure 8.4 
 

Plot of age related changes in whole body mineral content of school children 
 

 
 

Whole body mineral content of middle-income, semi-urban school children is plotted against 
their mean age. The mineral content increased at a slower rate below the age of 11.5 y (with a 
slope of about 116 g/y) as compared to the pubertal spurt (with a slope of 170 g/y) during 11-
16y28. 
 

 
  

152 
 



Annexure 8.5 
 

Factorial method for estimating calcium requirements in children and adolescents 
 

S No Age group (years) 1-3 4-6 7-9 10-12 13-15 16-17 

1 Weight (Kg) 12 18.4 25.2 35.4 50.3 58 

Retention of calcium per 
2 75 85 95 145 180 180 

day (mg) 

Fecal endogenous loss 
3 17 26 35 50 70 81 

(mg) 

4 Urinary excretion (mg) 40 40 40 40 40 40 

5 Sweat loss (mg) 30 30 30 30 30 30 

Total calcium requirements 
6 162 181 200 265 320 331 

(Adding steps 2 to 5) 

7 Absorption (%) 40 40 40 40 40 40 

8 Total intake needed (EAR) 405 452 501 661 801 828 

9 RDA (EAR + 2SD) 506 565 626 827 1001 1035 

 
 

153 
 



8.2. MAGNESIUM 

Since the report of McCollum et al1 inducing magnesium deficiency in rats and dogs in 
1933, magnesium deficiency in humans has been always found to be associated with other 
disease states mostly as inborn errors of absorption and not as an isolated magnesium deficiency. 
Like calcium, magnesium is closely associated with skeletal system and is homeostatically 
regulated by calcitropic hormones. About 20-25 g magnesium is present in adult human body 
and about 60-70% of it occurs in the bone, 25-30% in the muscle, 6-8% in soft tissues and 1% in 
the extracellular fluid. In adults, magnesium is mostly an integral part of the bone crystal 
structure along with calcium and phosphorus, but in growing children, a substantial portion of it 
is in the surface of the bone and its matrix. Magnesium as well as calcium form complexes with 
phospholipids of cell membranes and nucleic acids. Magnesium is also important for 
maintaining electrical potential in nerves and muscle membranes. Magnesium deficiency leads 
to neuromuscular dysfunction. 
 

8.2.1 Diet 

Magnesium is widely distributed in foods. As it is the metal ion in chlorophyll, plants form 
major source of magnesium. Animal products, along with legumes and cereals help to ensure 
adequate consumption of Magnesium by man. Magnesium is absorbed both by passive diffusion 
and by a carrier-mediated transport in the intestinal tract. In metabolic studies the absorption of 
magnesium ranged from 50-70% and in self-elected diet over long periods, the absorption was 
found to be around 25-30%. Thus, there is no chance of dietary magnesium deficiency occurring 
under normal dietary situation unless accompanied by a malabsorption syndrome or abnormal 
disease condition. Magnesium intake in different regions of India was found to range from 540 
mg to 1002 mg and average absorption of magnesium ranges from 13% to 50%. A point to note 
is that there are a few research articles which have recently suggested of evidence that 
Magnesium intakes have been declining substantially since the beginning of the century in the 
western world2. NNMB urban survey (2016) has noted that the median adult magnesium intake 
among Indian adults was 323 mg/d. 
 

8.2.2.  Deficiency 

Symptoms of abnormal neuromuscular function occur in magnesium depletion associated 
with malabsorption syndromes like inflammatory bowel disease or sprue, primary idiopathic 
hypomagnesemia and severe protein energy malnutrition. In severe deficiency, the subjects 
suffer often from tetany and convulsions. Hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia and hypokalemia are 
always associated with magnesium deficiency and are reversed by magnesium repletion. The 
symptoms are largely as a result of associated hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia and 
hypokalemia2. A syndrome of magnesium-dependent, vitamin D-resistant rickets was described 
in Indian child case reports3.  
 

8.2.3.  Biochemical function 

Magnesium is the main intracellular earth metal cation and the second most abundant 
intracellular cation, with a free cytosol concentration of around 0.5 mmol/L2. Magnesium is an 
important cofactor of many regulatory enzymes, particularly the kinases, and is fundamental in 
the energy transfer reactions involving high energy compounds like ATP and creatine phosphate 
and thus muscle contraction. This also explains the key role of magnesium in heart health and 
skeletal system. Blood magnesium is maintained in a narrow range like that of calcium. In view 
of this close association of occurrence and functions of Ca and Mg, there have been mutually 
reinforcing as well as contraindicative roles of these two divalent anions, particularly in bone 

154 
 



health and hypertension. A large number of interventional and clinical studies reveal variable 
effects of magnesium supplementation on essential hypertension4 and pregnancy-induced 
hypertension and pre-eclampsia5,6,7, other than the associated changes that take place due to 
hypokalemia and its correction. Several studies have linked its role in vascular complications of 
Diabetes and stroke, while some studies have implicated its neuro-protective nature in several 
experimental models of ischemic and excitotoxic brain injury2. 

In a report by Singh RB et al.8 lower levels of plasma magnesium and zinc and reduced 
zinc / copper ratio were associated with coronary artery disease in Indians. The dietary intake of 
magnesium reported by them was 430 mg and 370 mg/d in the rural and urban population, 
respectively, confirming the earlier data of Rao and Rao collected in 19809. These are further 
confirmed by reports from North India by Kapil and others10,11. 

8.2.4. Requirements 

Based on the balance studies and tracer turnover studies, the requirement of magnesium 
has been worked out for adults. The earlier Committee did not suggest any RDA as there was no 
possibility of any Mg deficiency, in our population. The intakes were estimated to vary between 
540 mg -1000 mg/d in different regional diets in India. The absorption also varied between 20-
50%. At any intake tested, the retention was positive and was above 20-30 mg/d.3 

These intakes suggest that there is no scope for Mg deficiency as the recommendations of 
FAO/WHO were 260 mg/d for adult males5 and 420 mg/d according to US National Academy of 
Sciences. 

Recent stable isotopic studies with 25Mg and 26Mg indicated that 50% and 90% labelled 
Mg from maternal milk can be absorbed by an infant12. Some recent studies in 26 adolescent 
females7 showed that 52 6.7% Mg was absorbed in a day, resulting in 174 mg retention of Mg 
daily. On the basis of 50% absorption, FAO/WHO6 has recommended desirable intake of Mg as 
4 mg/kg/day for international use. 

The data of Rao and Rao9 were reanalyzed for determining the safe intakes. The data given 
as mean values with each diet were treated as a cluster and subjected to correlations (intra-class) 
for possibly arriving at the intakes for equilibrium or zero balance. As to be expected, there was 
no significant linear correlation between Mg intake on one hand and any of the parameters like 
urinary excretion or balance, both as absolute values or as % of intake on the other. This 
obviously makes the task difficult to work out the requirements based on retention data directly. 
However, there was a significant positive correlation between intake and fecal loss (Figure 
8.2.1A). The regression equation applicable was Y= -184 + (0.916) X, where X is intake and Y 
is excretion of Mg (mg/d) in stool. With increasing intake in the diet, there is an increase in the 
excretion of Mg. By extrapolation of the regression line, the fecal loss was 184 mg at 0 intake 
and this, in principle corresponds to obligatory fecal loss. Also there was a curvilinear 
relationship between intake and urinary excretion (Fig 8.2.1B). From this, it appears that the 
urinary loss is more or less constant around 135 mg in the range of intakes of 540-796 mg and 
then steadily increases to a mean of 191 mg in ranging intakes of 863-1002 mg. Therefore, one 
can expect an average urinary loss of 130 mg at habitual intake range and the total amount of Mg 
loss appeared to be in equilibrium (in all situations the balance was adequately positive). Thus, a 
total intake of 184 +135= 319 or 320 mg of dietary Mg could be considered as the safe average 
requirement. This exercise serves as the basis for estimating the EAR for adult males to be 320 
mg/d. The variance in requirements cannot be determined from the available data. Thus, a 
coefficient of variation (CV) of 10 percent is assumed13, thus RDA for magnesium is computed 
as 385 mg/d. 

155 
 



The EARs of adult women, pregnant and lactating women were adjusted to weight. EARs 
for children have been estimated based on relative body weights, as a function of reference 
weights and growth, using the formula: 

EAR child = EAR adult x F, where  
 

F    = (Weight of child/weight of adult)0.75 x (1+GF) 
 

GF             = 0.57 for ages up to 1 years,  
0.25 for ages 1 to 3,  
0.06 for ages 4 to 6, 
0.13 for ages 7 to 9, 
In ages 10 to 15 – 0.11 for boys and 0.08 for girls, 
In ages 16 to 18 – 0.08 for boys and 0.03 for girls. 

 

RDAs were calculated from EARs with a coefficient of Variation of 10%. 
 

Table 8.2.1. Recommended Daily Allowance of Magnesium for Indians 
 

RDA 2020 
Body IOM - 2000 

RDA 2010 TUL* 
Physiological Group weight EAR RDA H-AR RDA 

(mg/day) (mg/day) 
(Kg) (mg/day) (mg/day) (mg/day) 

Adult Men 65 320 385 340 350 350 420 

Adult Women 55 270 325 310 350 265 320 

Pregnant 55+GWG 320 385 310 350 390 350 

Lactating 55+ 270 325 310 350 255 310 

Infants (0-6 mo) 5.8 -  30(AI) 30 - - 30 

Infants (6-12 mo) 8.5 - 75(AI) 45 - - 75 

Children (1-3y) 11.7 111 135 50 65 65 80 

Children (4-6y) 18.3 131 155 70 110 110 130 

Children (7-9y) 25.3 178 215 100 110 110 130 

Boys (10-12y) 34.9 223 270 120 350 200 240 

Girls (10-12y) 36.4 214 255 160 350 200 240 

Boys (13-15y) 50.5 294 355 165 350 200 410 

Girls (13-15y) 49.6 270 325 210 350 200 360 

Boys (16-18y) 63.1 338 405 195 350 340 410 

Girls (16-18y) 55.2 279 335 235 350 300 360 

*TULs are only for non-dietary pharmacological doses of magnesium, whereas dietary intake can go well 
above the TUL value. 

 

There is a need for some renewed balance studies on Mg requirements for fixing RDA for 
Indians of all physiological groups. 
 
8.2.5. Tolerable upper limits 
 

Magnesium, when ingested as a naturally occurring substance in foods, has not been 
demonstrated to exert any adverse effects. However, adverse effects of excess magnesium intake 
have been observed with intakes from nonfood sources such as various magnesium salts used for 
pharmacologic purposes. Thus, a Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) cannot be based on 
magnesium obtained from foods. Therefore, magnesium intake that could result in adverse 
effects was from that obtained from its pharmacological use. 

 

156 
 



Magnesium is generally used in drugs for its cathartic effect, and causes osmotic diarrhea 
on excessive consumption. This diarrhea is not demonstrated with normal or even large dietary 
intakes of magnesium. Other effects of hyper magnesium include metabolic alkalosis, 
dehydration, paralytic ileus and rarely cardiac arrest.  

 
Figure 8.2.1: Correlation between magnesium intake and fecal excretion 

 
 r=0.896 

900  
 

800  
 

700

 
600  

 
500

 

400  
 

300  
 

200

400 600  800 1000 1200

Inta ke (mg/d)

 
 

Figure 8.2.2: Relationship between magnesium intake and urinary loss 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

The LOAEL identified for magnesium-induced diarrhea in adults is 360 mg (15 mmol)/day 
of magnesium from nonfood sources based on the results of Bashir et al.14 With an uncertainty 
factor of 1.0, TUL was calculated at 350 mg per day of non-dietary consumption for adolescents 
and adults including the pregnant and lactating. TUL for ages 1 to 9 are calculated on body-
weight basis and reference weights13. 

 
 

157 
 

Fecal excretion (mg/d)



References 

1 Kruse HD, Orent ER. Studies on magnesium deficiency in animals. 1. Symptomatology resulting: 
from magnesium deprivation. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 1932; 96:519-39. 

2 Saris NE, Mervaala E, Karppanen H, Khawaja JA, Lewenstam A. Magnesium: an update on 
physiological, clinical and analytical aspects. Clinica chimica acta. 2000 Apr 1; 294(1-2):1-26. 

3 Reddy V, Sivakumar B. Magnesium-dependent vitamin-D-resistant rickets. The Lancet. 1974 May 
18; 303(7864):963-5. 

4 Tillman DM, Semple PF. Calcium and magnesium in essential hypertension. Clinical Science. 1988 
Oct; 75(4):395-402. 

5  Roberts JM, Balk JL, Bodnar LM, Belizán JM, Bergel E, Martinez A. Nutrient involvement in 
preeclampsia. The Journal of nutrition. 2003 May 1; 133(5):1684S-92S. 

6 Makrides M, Crowther CA. Magnesium supplementation in pregnancy. [Update in Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2001; (4): CD000937; PMID: 11687087]. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000. 

7 Bucher HC, Guyatt GH, Cook RJ, Hatala R, Cook DJ, Lang JD, Hunt D. Effect of calcium 
supplementation on pregnancy-induced hypertension and preeclampsia: a meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Jama. 1996 Apr 10; 275(14):1113-7. 

8 Singh RB, Gupta UC, Mittal N, Niaz MA, Ghosh S, Rastogi V. Epidemiologic study of trace 
elements and magnesium on risk of coronary artery disease in rural and urban Indian populations. 
Journal of the American College of Nutrition. 1997 Feb 1; 16(1):62-7. 

9 Rao N, Rao N. Absorption and retention of magnesium and some trace elements by man from typical 
Indian diets. Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism. 1980; 24(4):244-54. 

10 Pathak P, Kapil U, Kapoor SK, Saxena R, Kumar A, Gupta N, Dwivedi SN, Singh R, Singh P. 
Prevalence of multiple micronutrient deficiencies amongst pregnant women in a rural area of 
Haryana. The Indian Journal of Pediatrics. 2004 Nov 1; 71(11):1007-14. 

11 Kapil U, Verma D, Goel M, Saxena N, Gnanasekaran N, Goindi G, Nayar D. Dietary intake of trace 
elements and minerals among adults in underprivileged communities of rural Rajasthan, India. Asia 
Pacific journal of clinical nutrition. 1998 Mar; 7:29-32. 

12 Liu YM, Neal P, Ernst J, Weaver C, Rickard K, Smith DL, Lemons J. Absorption of calcium and 
magnesium from fortified human milk by very low birth weight infants. Pediatric research. 1989 
May; 25(5):496-502. 

13 Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference 
Intakes. Dietary reference intakes. In Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorus, 
Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Fluoride 1997. National Academies Press (US). 

14 Bashir Y, Sneddon JF, Staunton HA, Haywood GA, Simpson IA, McKenna WJ, Camm AJ. Effects 
of long-term oral magnesium chloride replacement in congestive heart failure secondary to coronary 
artery disease. The American journal of cardiology. 1993 Nov 15; 72(15):1156-62. 

 

158 
 



8.3   SODIUM AND POTASSIUM 
 
SODIUM (Na+): 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Sodium is the 6th most abundant element on earth and the principal cation in extracellular 
fluid in the body, and is an essential nutrient necessary for maintenance of plasma volume, acid–
base balance, transmission of nerve impulses and normal cell function. The sodium-potassium 
gradient across the cellular membrane is maintained by a sodium-potassium pump or Na+/K+ 
ATPase, which uses considerable energy in the body at rest. Sodium is a macro element (required 
in milligram quantities), and functions as the “osmotic skeleton” of the extracellular fluid. The 
body content of sodium and its concentration in body fluids is under tight homoeostatic control. 
Kidney is the primary organ responsible for maintaining sodium balance through aldosterone 
action on renal tubular function. When the dietary intake is zero, level of aldosterone increases 
and urinary sodium rapidly decreases. Converse is true when sodium intake is high. Man and other 
mammals have evolved on a no-added salt diet. Records of primitive people suggest that they did 
not use much salt and were free from hypertension1. On land, which may be considered to be a 
sodium-restricted environment, powerful inbuilt mechanisms such as renal-renin-angiotensin 
aldosterone and the kinin-prostaglandin systems have evolved a mechanism to maintain blood 
pressure and renal blood flow on low or minimal sodium intake. 

 

Dietary Sources 
 

The main source of sodium is common salt (sodium chloride), by weight table salt is 
approximately 40 percent sodium and 60 percent chloride. The salt content of natural diets, 
predominantly plant-based foods in India, does not exceed 300-400 mg of Na (1g of NaCl). 
Sodium comes from domestic cooking as well as from processed foods such as bakery products, 
pickles, dry fish, nuts etc. Sodium is also found naturally in a variety of foods, such as milk, meat 
and shellfish. Diet provides 90% sodium from sodium chloride (salt) and only 10-15% originates 
from natural foods. High amounts of sodium are found in many condiments (e.g. soy and fish 
sauces). Thus, a diet high in processed foods and low in fresh fruits and vegetables is often high 
in sodium. The total body content of Na+ in a 60 kg man is approximately 92 g. 
 
Absorption & Excretion 
 

Sodium is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and the usual routes of excretion 
are urine, feces and skin. In healthy individuals, nearly 100% of ingested sodium is absorbed 
during digestion, and urinary excretion is the primary mechanism for maintaining sodium balance. 
Even in hot, humid climates, there are only minimal loses through feces and sweat. 

 
Adequate Intakes for Sodium 
 

Sodium content of breast milk is higher immediately after delivery (65-75 mmol/L) and falls 
precipitously by day three. Mature human milk contains 7 mmol/L of sodium2. Although the 
minimum intake level necessary for proper bodily function is not well defined, it is estimated to 
be as little as 200–500 mg/day. Based on the National Academy of Sciences, USA “Dietary 
Reference Intakes for Sodium and Potassium (2019)” the following adequate intakes [AI] have 
been proposed for sodium for the different age groups. The AI for infants 0-6 months and 7-12 
months is 110 mg/day and 370 mg/day respectively. Children [1-3y] the AI is 800 mg/day while 
[4-8y] is 1000 mg/day; 9-13y it is 1200 mg/day and 14-18y it is fixed at 1500 mg/day irrespective 

159 
 



of gender; and >19 years is fixed at 1500 mg/day. The AI for adults of 19 years of age and older 
is based on the lowest levels of sodium intakes evaluated in randomized controlled trials for which 
there was no evidence of deficiency, evidence from the best-designed balance study, and 
insufficient evidence of harmful effects from observational studies. Sodium AIs for children and 
adolescents were extrapolated based on sedentary Estimated Energy Requirements. For infants, 
the AI’s were derived from estimates of sodium intakes in breastfed infants. 

 

The function of sodium and potassium in the body are closely linked. As sodium 
consumption increases, increased consumption of potassium may be even more beneficial 
because, in addition to other benefits, it can mitigate the negative effects of elevated sodium 
consumption on blood pressure. Potassium increases urinary sodium excretion which diminishes 
body sodium. In addition, potassium is thought to induce vascular smooth muscle relaxation and 
thus decrease peripheral resistance. The blood pressure lowering effects of potassium intake are 
greater in individuals ingesting higher sodium, and the Na:K ratio had a stronger effect on the risk 
of cardiovascular disease than sodium or potassium alone. Studies have reported that maintaining 
a 1:1 ratio of the two nutrients is an important factor in cardiovascular disease and mortality 3, 4. 

 

Deficiency and Excess 
 

Normal sodium levels are usually in the range of 136-145 mmol/L. Low sodium levels 
referred to as ‘Hyponatremia’ occurs when the concentration of sodium in the blood is abnormally 
low. Hyponatremia occurs due to one or more factors, ranging from an underlying medical 
condition, kidney and liver problems, adrenal gland insufficiency, drinking too much water and 
chronic diarrhea. When this happens, the body's water levels rise, and cells begin to swell. 
Symptoms of hyponatremia include nausea, vomiting, confusion, restlessness, muscle weakness, 
seizures and coma. On the other hand high blood levels of sodium also known as ‘Hypernatremia’, 
is caused due to low fluid intake, diarrhea and kidney dysfunction. Typically the initial symptom 
of hypernatremia is thirst. If the volume of water lost is greater than sodium loss and if water 
replacement is inadequate due to failure of thirst mechanism, then hypernatremia could occur. 
However, hypernatremia can cause serious symptoms such as muscle twitching, seizures and 
coma.  

 

Hypertension and salt intake studies from India 
 

The average Indian diet has undergone a drastic nutrition transition over the last three 
decades. The intake of unprocessed cereals, fruits and vegetables has decreased while 
consumption of meat products and processed foods has increased5. High BP is the leading cause 
of non-communicable disease (NCD) in India and the prevalence rates of hypertension are 
expected to almost double from 118 million in 2000 to 213 million in 20256. The Global burden 
of disease study (2010) reported excess salt intake to be the seventh leading cause of global 
mortality from cardiovascular disease7. Studies done in adolescent and adult Indian population 
indicate a clear link between high salt and occurrence of hypertension8-10. The daily intake in 
Indians varies between 2.3 g - 9.2 g depending on the dietary habits. About 90 percent of the 
sodium we eat is in the form of sodium chloride. A single teaspoon of salt contains 2.3 grams of 
sodium, which is the maximum recommended amount per day. A person with high blood pressure 
should get no more than 1,500 milligrams per day, and the limit drops even lower if you have 
kidney or liver problems. A single dash of table salt contains about 150 mg of sodium. Indians 
have been taking much more salt as against the 5 g/day or 2 g sodium/day limit recommended by 
WHO11, said a new study conducted by the Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI).The study 
found that salt intake in Delhi and Haryana was 9.5 g/day and 10.4 g/day in Andhra Pradesh12. All 
member states of WHO including India, have set a target of 30% reduction in mean population 
salt intake by the year 2025, as part of the ‘25 by 25’ initiative for the control of NCDs13. 

160 
 



Studies conducted in different regions of India show that salt consumption is way beyond 
the WHO-recommended maximum of 5 g/day/person. A population survey of 1395 persons from 
both urban and rural [North & South] India indicated a salt intake of 9-10 g/day14. Two other 
studies conducted in 8000 and 1900 individuals from Southern India suggested higher dietary 
intake of salt which was an independent predictor of systolic BP15, 16. Yet another study from South 
India in subjects with diabetes, hypertension and renal dysfunction indicated intake of high dietary 
salt17. A study from western India showed higher salt intake and high sodium content in ready-to-
eat foods18. The ICMR-INDIAB study (2015) reported high salt intake (>6.5 g/day) with a 
significantly higher risk for hypertension in three states and one union territory19. A cross-sectional 
study carried out in infants (6.5 months old) in West Bengal reported a correlation between poor 
early growth and high salt intake which could be a risk factor for arterial hypertension20. 

 

A recent survey conducted in participants from North and South India showed high 
consumption of salt (~11 g/day) and most of it came from added salt21. A community based cross-
sectional study was conducted among women aged 20 to 59 years in North India, where 
knowledge, attitude, and behavior questionnaire given by the World Health Organization and 24h 
dietary recall were used22. The results show that approximately, 80% of the participants believed 
that high salt diet causes serious health problems, and only 5% of the participants were aware of 
the existence of a recommendation for daily salt intake. Vegetable-based dishes were found to be 
the major contributors to the daily salt intake followed by pulse-based and cereal-based dishes, 
because of the high quantity in which they are consumed22. The INTERSALT study is a 
standardized, worldwide epidemiologic study of large sample size (n = 10079 men and women 
aged 20-59y from 32 countries) that tested both within and cross-population 24h sodium excretion 
and blood pressure. For individuals, a significant, positive, independent linear relation between 
24h sodium excretion and systolic blood pressure (SBP) was found23. 

 

The National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) has conducted a large and 
comprehensive urban nutrition survey in 2016 [using a one day 24-hour dietary recall method] for 
the first time in 16 states in India, where the information on dietary intakes was collected from 
about 13,000 households. The consumption level of salt through dietary recall, were assessed for 
individual subjects in the study. The state wise salt consumption among rural communities was 
done by NNMB rural survey in 2011-12. The salt intake was below the recommended level (5 
g/day) in rural adults in both the genders, while higher than the recommended level in the urban 
adult population. The sodium and potassium intakes were computed from the 24h dietary recall 
method by using the IFCT tables [for urban population] and NVIF tables [for rural population]. 
The median sodium intakes appear to be higher than the WHO recommended intake (2000 
mg/day) in the adult [18-60y] urban population and much lower in the adult rural population in 
both the genders.  

 

The NNMB urban survey data in respect of salt, sodium and potassium intakes was classified 
further into subjects who are non-hypertensive and hypertensive of both the genders. The data 
suggests that on an average the salt or sodium intake was higher in males compared to females 
among the non-hypertensive adult population, while the potassium intakes were lower in females 
compared to males irrespective of whether they were hypertensives or non-hypertensives. Higher 
percentage of subjects were found to be consuming more amount of salt (>5 g/day) and sodium 
(>2 g/day) irrespective of whether they were hypertensives or non-hypertensives in both the 
genders. Lower percentage (21.1%) of females consuming <2 g of sodium and >3.5 g of potassium 
were hypertensive compared to males (39.7%) who were hypertensive. Also, lower percentage [5-
11%] of subjects were consuming more than the recommended amount of potassium [i.e. 3.5 
g/day] in both the genders. 
 

161 
 



POTASSIUM (K+): 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 

Potassium is the most abundant intracellular cation in the body. It is an essential nutrient 
needed for maintenance of total body fluid volume, acid-base and electrolyte balance, and normal 
cell function. Its total body content in a 60 kg man approximates 3000 to 4000 mmol (50 mmol/kg 
of body weight). Eighty percent of this amount is in the skeletal muscles. Of the total body stores 
of potassium, about 98% is in the intracellular fluid (ICF) at concentrations of 140 to 150 mmol/L, 
whereas the extracellular fluid (ECF) contains only 2% [60-80mmol] of total body potassium. The 
normal serum potassium concentration is maintained within a narrow range of 3.5 to 5.0 
mmol/Lover a wide range of potassium intakes. Potassium content decreases with age and 
adiposity. Total body potassium corresponds closely to lean body mass. Enzymes involved in 
glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation are potassium-dependent. 

 

Dietary Sources 
 

Natural diets usually provide around 50-150 mmol of potassium per day (5-10 g of KCl). 
The major sources of potassium are plant foods such as cereals, pulses, fruits and vegetables. 
Vegetables such as avocado, broccoli, carrots, peas, lentils, tomatoes, potatoes, sweet potatoes, 
fruits like apricots, bananas, citrus fruits, milk, dairy products and nuts, meat and fish (clams, 
halibut, salmon and sardines) are good sources of potassium. Coconut water is a rich source which 
contains 1400mg of K+/liter. Diet can provide around 4 - 7.5 g (50-100 mmol/day) of potassium 
chloride. Potassium losses from cooking may be significant. Food processing reduces the amount 
of potassium in many food products, and a diet high in processed foods and low in fresh fruits and 
vegetables is often lacking in potassium. 

 

Absorption and Excretion 
 

In a normal person 90% of potassium consumed is absorbed by diffusion and is readily 
distributed in aqueous media throughout the body24. Similar to Na+, approximately 80% to 95% 
of the daily potassium intake is excreted in the urine, and 5% to 20% is excreted in the stool. 
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and cortisol increase urinary loss of potassium. The kidney’s 
ability to conserve potassium is less than that of sodium and serves as the major chronic protective 
mechanism against toxicity. Even with zero potassium intake urine continues to excrete potassium 
reducing it to a minimum of 5-20 mmol/day. Ninety to ninety five percent is reabsorbed by the 
proximal renal tubules and loop of Henle and on a normal dietary intake; potassium is secreted by 
distal tubules. 

 

Adequate Intakes for Potassium 
 

Potassium content of human milk is greater in early milk (19 mmol/L or 741 mg/L) than 
mature milk (15 mmol/L or 585 mg/L)25. Based on the National Academy of Sciences, USA 
“Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium and Potassium (2019)” the following adequate intakes 
[AI] have been proposed for potassium for the different age groups. The adequate intake [AI] for 
potassium is established at 400 mg/day for 0-6 month old infants, while the AI for 7-12 month old 
infants is 860 mg/day which includes complementary foods26. The AI for 1-3 years is 2000mg/day 
and for 4-8 years is 2300 mg/day. The AI for 9-13y and 14-18y for male children is fixed at 2500 
mg/day and 3000 mg/day, while for females of 9-18y it is 2300 mg/day. For >19y-70y of age 
males it is 3400mg/day, and for females of the same age group it is 2600 mg/day. In the absence 
of a specific indicator of potassium adequacy or deficiency, Adequate Intakes were derived using 
two nationally representative surveys. The highest median potassium intake across the two surveys 
was selected for each DRI group in children and adolescents, for   adult females, and for adult 

162 
 



males. For adults, the data that informed the potassium AIs were from normotensive males and 
females without a self-reported history of cardiovascular disease. For infants, the AIs were derived 
from estimates of potassium intakes in breastfed infants. Potassium requirement in pregnant and 
lactating women has been recommended to be around 4g and 4.4g respectively from a recent 
German study27. This amount is likely to be supplied by an increase in cereals and pulses intake. 

 

Deficiency and Excess 
 

Low blood potassium levels leads to potassium deficiency also known as ‘hypokalemia’. 
Normal blood potassium levels are typically in the range of 3.5-5.0 mmol/L. Among the many 
causes of hypokalemia are diarrhea, chronic kidney disease, folic acid deficiency, excessive 
sweating and use of diuretics. Potassium deficiency symptoms are often mild and may include 
nausea, muscle cramps, bloating, constipation and depression. When there is too much potassium 
in the blood, it is called high potassium, or ‘hyperkalemia’. Increase in blood potassium can be 
caused by dehydration, kidney disease, uncontrolled diabetes and excessive bleeding. 

 

Potassium intake data from India 
 

Potassium present in vegetarian food is probably enough to meet the daily requirement. 
WHO recommends an increase in potassium intake in adults from food to reduce blood pressure 
and risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke and coronary heart disease. WHO suggests a potassium 
intake of at least 90 mmol/day (3510 mg/day) for adults28. Data with regard to potassium intakes 
in the Indian population is lacking. The intake of potassium in the NNMB urban population survey 
in 16 states [2016] and rural population survey in 10 states in India by the dietary recall method 
was computed. The potassium intakes appear to be much lower than the WHO recommended 
(3510 mg/day) in both the genders in the adult urban as well as rural populations. This could be 
attributed to the consumption of lower amounts of vegetables and fruits than the recommended 
servings/day. 

 

Recommended Intakes for Sodium and Potassium 
 

Hypertension is considered a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases, particularly 
coronary heart disease and stroke. Therefore, the burden of morbidity and mortality from 
hypertension and related non-communicable diseases [NCDs] is currently one of the most urgent 
public health problems globally. The basis for the current guidelines of WHO for reduction in 
sodium intake and increase in potassium intakes is to prevent adverse health outcomes, i.e. 
reduction in blood pressure and thereby reduction in risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke and 
coronary heart disease in adults. If the WHO guidelines on both sodium and potassium are 
followed the molar ratio of sodium: potassium would be approximately one to one which is the 
desirable ratio. Due to lack of systematic balance studies [intake vs excretion] for both sodium 
and potassium in the normal Indian population, it is proposed to follow the WHO (2012) 
guidelines for these two electrolytes for the current RDA. The recommended intakes for sodium 
and potassium for the different physiological groups in the ICMR (2020) based on WHO (2012), 
are shown below in Table 8.3.1.The sodium and potassium intakes for infants and children were 
calculated based on the energy requirement [kcal] of a particular group taking the energy 
requirement of sedentary work for adult man [i.e. 2110 kcal] as the reference [Energy Chapter –
RDA 2020]. 

 
 
 
 
 

163 
 



Table 8.3.1: Recommended intakes of sodium and potassium (mg/d) 
 

Sodium          Potassium 
Age Group Molar ratio 

[mg]               [mg] 

Adult Men 1:1 2000 3500 
[18-60y] Women 1:1 2000 3500 

Infants 0-6 m 1:1 500 900 

Infants 7-12 m 1:1 650 1100 

1-3 y 1:1 1000 1750 
Children 4-6 y 1:1 1300 2250 

7-9 y 1:1 1600 2825 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

164 
 



References 

1. Gleibermann L. Blood pressure and dietary salt in human populations. Ecology of food and nutrition. 
1973 Jan 1; 2(2):143-56. 

2. Morgano MA, Souza LA, Rondó PH. Mineral composition of human bank milk. Ciênc Tecnol Aliment. 
2005; 25:819-24. 

3. Cook NR, Obarzanek E, Cutler JA, Buring JE, Rexrode KM, Kumanyika SK, Appel LJ, Whelton PK. 
Joint effects of sodium and potassium intake on subsequent cardiovascular disease: the Trials of 
Hypertension Prevention follow-up study. Archives of internal medicine. 2009 Jan 12; 169(1):32-40. 

4. Yang Q, Liu T, Kuklina EV, Flanders WD, Hong Y, Gillespie C, Chang MH, Gwinn M, Dowling N, 
Khoury MJ, Hu FB. Sodium and potassium intake and mortality among US adults: prospective data 
from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Archives of internal medicine. 2011 
Jul 11; 171(13):1183-91. 

5. Misra A, Singhal N, Sivakumar B, Bhagat N, Jaiswal A, Khurana L. Nutrition transition in India: 
Secular trends in dietary intake and their relationship to diet‐related non‐communicable diseases. 
Journal of diabetes. 2011 Dec; 3(4):278-92. 

6. Mozaffarian D, Fahimi S, Singh GM, Micha R, Khatibzadeh S, Engell RE, Lim S, Danaei G, Ezzati 
M, Powles J. Global sodium consumption and death from cardiovascular causes. New England Journal 
of Medicine. 2014 Aug 14; 371(7):624-34. 

7. Lim SS, Vos T, Flaxman AD, Danaei G, Shibuya K, Adair-Rohani H, AlMazroa MA, Amann M, 
Anderson HR, Andrews KG, Aryee M. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury 
attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis 
for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The lancet. 2012 Dec 15; 380(9859):2224-60. 

8. Sarma PS, Sadanandan R, Thulaseedharan JV, Soman B, Srinivasan K, Varma RP, Nair MR, 
Pradeepkumar AS, Jeemon P, Thankappan KR, Kutty RV. Prevalence of risk factors of non-
communicable diseases in Kerala, India: results of a cross-sectional study. BMJ open. 2019 Nov 1; 
9(11). 

9. Mohan B, Verma A, Singh K, Singh K, Sharma S, Bansal R, Tandon R, Goyal A, Singh B, Chhabra 
ST, Aslam N, Wander GS, Roy A, Prabhakaran D. Prevalence of sustained hypertension and obesity 
among urban and rural adolescents: a school-based, cross-sectional study in North India. BMJ Open. 
2019; 8, 9(9):e027134.  

10. Smina TP, Kumpatla S, Viswanathan V. Higher dietary salt and inappropriate proportion of 
macronutrients consumption among people with diabetes and other co morbid conditions in South 
India: Estimation of salt intake with a formula. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & 
Reviews. 2019 Sep 1;13(5):2863-8. 

11. World Health Organization. Sodium intake for adults and children: guideline. Geneva: World Health 
Organization. 2012. 

12. Johnson C, Santos JA, Sparks E, Raj TS, Mohan S, Garg V, Rogers K, Maulik PK, Prabhakaran D, 
Neal B, Webster J Sources of Dietary Salt in North and South India Estimated from 24 Hour Dietary 
Recall. Nutrients. 2019; 1; 11(2). pii: E318. 

13. World Health Organisation, Draft comprehensive global monitoring framework and targets for the 
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases. 2013. 

14. Johnson C, Mohan S, Rogers K, Shivashankar R, Thout SR, Gupta P, He FJ, MacGregor GA, Webster 
J, Krishnan A, Maulik PK. Mean dietary salt intake in urban and rural areas in India: a population 
survey of 1395 persons. Journal of the American Heart Association. 2017 Jan 6; 6(1):e004547. 

15. Ravi S, Bermudez OI, Harivanzan V, Chui KH, Vasudevan P, Must A, Thanikachalam S, 
Thanikachalam M. Sodium intake, blood pressure, and dietary sources of sodium in an adult South 
Indian population. Annals of global health. 2016 Mar 1;82(2):234-42. 

165 
 



16. Radhika G, Sathya RM, Sudha V, Ganesan A, Mohan V. Dietary salt intake and hypertension in an 
urban south Indian population–[CURES-53]. Journal of Association of Physicians of India. 2007 Jun 
1; 55(6):405-11. 

17. Smina TP, Kumpatla S, Viswanathan V. Higher dietary salt and inappropriate proportion of 
macronutrients consumption among people with diabetes and other co morbid conditions in South 
India: Estimation of salt intake with a formula. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & 
Reviews. 2019 Sep 1; 13(5):2863-8. 

18. Nair S, Bandyopadhyay S. Sodium intake pattern in West Indian population. Indian journal of 
community medicine: official publication of Indian Association of Preventive & Social Medicine. 2018 
Apr; 43(2):67. 

19. Bhansali A, Dhandania VK, Deepa M, Anjana RM, Joshi SR, Joshi PP, Madhu SV, Rao PV, Subashini 
R, Sudha V, Unnikrishnan R. Prevalence of and risk factors for hypertension in urban and rural India: 
the ICMR–INDIAB study. Journal of human hypertension. 2015 Mar; 29(3):204-9. 

20. Genovesi S, Antolini L, Orlando A, Brahmochary S, De Servi A, Capelli S, Giussani M, Nava E, 
Agostoni C, Gallieni M. Poor early growth and high salt intake in Indian infants. International journal 
of food sciences and nutrition. 2017 May 19; 68(4):467-72. 

21. Johnson C, Santos JA, Sparks E, Raj TS, Mohan S, Garg V, Rogers K, Maulik PK, Prabhakaran D, 
Neal B, Webster J. Sources of Dietary Salt in North and South India Estimated from 24 Hour Dietary 
Recall. Nutrients. 2019 Feb 1; 11(2). pii: E318. 

22. Aparna P, Salve HR, Anand K, Ramakrishnan L, Gupta SK, Nongkynrih B. Knowledge and behaviors 
related to dietary salt and sources of dietary sodium in north India. Journal of Family Medicine and 
Primary Care. 2019 Mar; 8(3):846. 

23. Stamler J. The INTERSALT Study: background, methods, findings, and implications. The American 
journal of clinical nutrition. 1997 Feb 1; 65(2):626S-42S. 

24. Agarwal R, Afzalpurkar R, Fordtran JS. Pathophysiology of potassium absorption and secretion by 
the human intestine. Gastroenterology. 1994; 107(2):548-571. 

25. Wack RP, Lien EL, Taft D, Roscelli JD. Electrolyte composition of human breast milk beyond the 
early postpartum period. Nutrition. 1997; 13(9):774-777. 

26. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for sodium 
and potassium. National Academies Press; 2019 Aug 26. 

27. Strohm D, Ellinger S, Leschik-Bonnet E, Maretzke F, Heseker H. Revised reference values for 
potassium intake. Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism. 2017; 71(1-2):118-24. 

28. Guideline WH. Potassium intake for adults and children. Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO). 
2012; 48. 

 

166 
 



9.  IRON  
 

 
INTRODUCTION 

Iron is an essential micronutrient required as a component for number of proteins, including 
enzymes and haemoglobin. The latter is important for transport of oxygen to tissues throughout the 
body for metabolism. It is also required for many critical functions in human body such as – energy 
metabolism, mixed function oxidase systems, neurodevelopment, connective tissue synthesis and 
hormone synthesis. 

  

The iron content of the body is tightly regulated and in absence of bleeding through 
menstruation and during pregnancy, only small amount of iron is lost from the body. Therefore, the 
physiological requirement is relatively low, particularly for men. The dietary requirement depends 
on the bioavailability of iron from the diet, and Indian diets typically are inhibitory to the absorption 
of iron. Thus, the bioavailability of iron through non-heme sources can increase the requirement for 
iron.  
 

9.1  Iron deficiency anemia (IDA) and its prevalence 
 

Anemia is a serious public health problem in India, affecting all segments of the population 
(50-70%), especially infants and young children, adolescent boys and girls, women of childbearing 
age and pregnant women. The national surveys conducted in India known as National Family 
Health Survey (3 and 4) shows that there is continuing high prevalence of anemia among Indians1,2 

(Table 9.1). Despite supplementation programs being in operation for decades, there has been no 
perceptible decrease in the prevalence of anemia. Its prevalence is similar in both urban and rural 
areas; however, gender differences exist from the age of 15 years, as females become more 
vulnerable to this malady. 

 

It has been thought that iron deficiency in the diet is the main cause of anemia in all age 
groups3-6. However, in the recent analysis by Ghosh et al7 showed that the median risk of 
inadequate intake of iron was in the range of 48-78% concluding that the risk of inadequate intake 
of iron among Indians is lower than previously thought. It was also emphasized that simultaneous 
implementation of supplementation and fortification program can increase the risk of increasing 
tolerable upper limit (TUL; 45 mg/d) for iron7. The iron deficiency is often seen to coexist with 
other causes of anemia in India. In an urban slum, 75% of children suffering from anemia were seen 
to respond to iron administration and 22% of anemic children also had biochemical vitamin B12 
deficiency1. In pregnant women, studies with serum transferrin receptor or TfR which is used as a 
marker of tissue iron deficiency8-10 suggested low iron stores and widespread iron deficiency. A 
study carried out by NIN in semi-urban school children showed prevalence of multiple sub-clinical 
micronutrient deficiencies11. 

 

9.2  Changes from the ICMR 2010 recommendation for Iron requirement: 
 

 The following changes were made: 
 

a. The requirement provided by previous committee was the recommended dietary allowance 
(RDA), which by definition is the 97.5th percentile of the distribution of requirements, and 
is specifically meant to define the requirement of an individual, where the risk of an 
inadequate intake is low. However, for public health and the definition of the risk of dietary 
inadequacy of iron in a population, the estimated average requirement (EAR) is required.  
Using the RDA for this purpose will overestimate the risk of deficiency. Further, the EAR 
is used in formulating food fortification and supplementation guidelines12. 

167 
 



Table 9.1: Prevalence (%) of anemia among Indians1,2 

 
NFHS 3 NFHS 4 

Category/ anemia 
prevalence 

Adult men 13.5 10.3 1.3 25.1 12.4 10.0 1.1 23.5 
WRA (15-49y) 38.6 14.8 1.8 55.3 39.8 12.3 1.1 53.2 
Pregnant women 25.8 30.6 2.2 58.7 24.5 24.6 1.3 50.4 
Lactating women 44.8 16.6 1.7 63.2 44.5 12.6 0.9 58.0 
Adolescent boys (15-19y) 16.7 12.1 1.4 30.2 15.5 12.5 1.2 29.2 
Adolescent girls (15-19y) 39.1 14.9 1.7 55.8 41.2 11.9 1.0 54.1 
Children         
6-11m 27.6 51.1 2.0 80.7 29.1 37.7 1.7 68.5 
12-23m 23.9 54.7 4.5 83.0 27.5 40.3 2.6 70.5 
24-35m 26.6 44.1 3.9 74.6 28.6 31.9 1.8 62.3 
36-47m 27.3 33.1 2.7 63.0 28.1 23.2 1.1 52.3 
48-59m 26.9 24.9 1.2 53.0 26.4 17.6 0.7 44.7 

WRA – Women of reproductive age 
 

b. The factorial approach to determine the requirement requires the mean value of each factor, 
as well as its variation. The basal loss considered in the previous recommendation was based 
on the mean iron loss per kg body weight, but did not consider the variance of the iron loss, 
nor of the body weights of different age groups of Indians. In the present recommendation, 
the variance of iron loss13was combined with the variability in the body weights for Indians.  

c. As described below in section 9.3.1, the distribution of iron losses due to menstruation was 
positively skewed; therefore, simple addition of this factor and its variance, within the 
factorial method is not possible. In this situation, Monte Carlo simulations were applied to 
obtain an approximated distribution of iron requirement. Further, the estimate for iron loss 
in menstruation was not clearly specified: this is now presented. 

 

9.3  Iron requirement 
 

The daily physiological requirement for iron was calculated using factorial method, sums the 
components of iron loss from the body, for all the age groups. This physiological requirement was 
then adjusted to iron bioavailability to provide EAR. The iron requirement for different age group is 
as follows: 
 

9.3.1  Adult 
 

 The requirement for iron is different for males and females as latter has additional iron loss 
through menstruation. 
 

Males 
 

In adult males, the daily iron is required to replace the basal iron lost through desquamated 
gastrointestinal cells, bile, urine and sweat. The distribution of basal iron loss was derived from the 
data reported on adult males from Seattle, Venezuela and South African Indians13. The average 
basal loss from the study was 14 µg/kg body weight/d with CV of 29.2%. The distribution of 
standard body weight for adult male was derived from NNMB urban survey (2016)14.The mean 

168 
 

Mild 

Moderate 

Severe 

Any 
anemia 

Mild 

Moderate 

Severe 

Any 
anemia 



body weight of adult male was reported as 65 kg with SD 4.3 kg. Assuming a symmetric shape of 
the distribution of iron requirement, the mean and SD of the distribution were derived by the 
product of mean body weight and mean basal loss per kg and the square root of combined variance 
of the product of body weight and basal loss per kg, respectively. Further, the physiological 
requirement for iron was adjusted for iron absorption. While a study conducted on adult men in 
1983 reported iron absorption of 5% from a cereal based diet15, a more extensive analysis of data 
from several recent studies in women (see below), indicated an absorption of 8% from similar 
cereal-based diets. There is no strong evidence suggesting that iron absorption in men will be lower 
than females, when both are iron replete. Therefore, the present EAR was adjusted for 8% iron 
absorption. The EAR of iron for adult Indian male was estimated to be 11.4 mg/d and RDA as 18.8 
mg/d (Table 9.6). 
 

Females  
 

Ghosh et al7 have recently analyzed the requirement for iron in WRA. For non-pregnant, non-
lactating WRA, components of iron loss are the daily basal iron loss and menstrual loss of iron. 
This summation uses the average value for each factor and yields the daily estimated average 
physiological requirement for iron. The EAR is then derived as the ratio of the physiological 
requirement and the bioavailability of iron from the diet.  

 

First, the distribution of the basal loss of iron was derived from the data reported on adult 
males from Seattle, Venezuela and South African Indians13. The average basal iron loss as a relation 
to the body weight was 14 µg/kg body weight/d with coefficient of variation (CV) 29.2%. Since 
data were not available for WRA, the basal iron loss reported for adult male was considered for this 
population. This is a reasonable assumption as there is no evidence to conclude that basal iron 
losses are different in women. To estimate variability in basal loss in WRA, the CV of basal loss 
per kg body weight was combined with the average CV of body weight in WRA between 18-49 
years of age which was estimated to be 15.6%, from national anthropometric data2, by variance of 
the product of two random variables assuming independence. For the reference body weight for 
WRA of 55 kg, an average daily iron loss of 0.77±0.25 (SD) mg/d. The probability distribution of 
basal loss was assumed to be normal. 

 

Second, for the distribution of iron losses due to menstruation, studies reporting menstrual 
blood loss or iron loss were considered16-25. There was only one study conducted in Indian women, 
therefore all relevant studies were included in the calculation of menstrual iron loss. Where blood 
loss was reported, the iron loss was derived as the product of the daily blood loss assuming an 
average of 28 days in a cycle26, the Hb concentration taken as 135 g/L unless otherwise reported27 

and the iron content of Hb taken as 3.39 mg/g28. In a validation of this approach, within the studies 
that reported iron loss, the mean bias of the calculated iron loss was only 0.05 mg/d. From the 
extracted literature, only one study was conducted on Indian WRA and due to limited data, all 
relevant studies were included in the analysis. Since the distribution of the menstrual iron loss 
appeared to be positively skewed in many studies, its probability distribution was taken as 
lognormal. Ghosh et al7 has reported the detailed calculation for estimating iron loss due to 
menstruation (Figure 9.1). Briefly, the mean and variance at the log scale were estimated from 
reported dispersion for each study. The reported range from the study was assumed to be from 0.5th 
to 99.5th percentile. The pooled estimates of mean and standard deviation were finally derived as 
weighted (based on the sample size) mean of the estimates obtained from all the studies. 
 

 
 
 

169 
 



Figure 9.1: Estimated distribution of menstrual iron loss from different studies  
[Adapted methodology from Ghosh et al7 and modified] 

 

 

Third, the absorption of dietary iron from different cereal-based Indian meals was determined 
from published reports on Indian WRA and adolescent girls29-32. The iron absorption from different 
cereal-based Indian meals was considered as the National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) 68th 
round showed that nearly 70% of the iron consumed is from cereals and only about 1% from heme 
sources33. The studies selected have used accurate iron absorption methods, which measured the 
incorporation of a stable isotope of iron provided in a common pool of iron from a meal into 
hemoglobin, and reported the mean and SD of iron absorption in anemic and normal WRA. An 
average absorption was calculated using weighted inverse of standard error of each study, the 
proportion of anemic and normal WRA in survey data2, and the proportion consumption in weight 
of rice, wheat and millet in the total cereal intake in the Indian population33. The average absorption 
of dietary iron was 8.7% which is similar to the value of 8%, used for WRA previous expert 
committee12, and this value was used to adjust the physiological requirement of iron to obtain the 
EAR. 

The distribution of iron requirements was obtained by convolution of the probability 
distribution of daily basal and menstrual iron loss. As no close form of the convolution of 
lognormal and normal distribution exists, Monte Carlo simulations were performed to obtain an 
approximated distribution of iron requirement. Finally, the median and 95th or 97.5th percentile were 
derived from estimated iron requirement distributions to represent the physiological EAR and RDA. 
These values were corrected for a dietary iron absorption of 8% to yield an EAR of 15 mg/d and 
RDA of 29 mg/d for the 97.5th percentile (Figure 9.2; Table 9.6). 
  

170 
 



Figure 9.2: EAR and RDA of iron for Indian WRA 
[Methodology adapted from Ghosh et al7 and modified] 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Risk of inadequate dietary iron intake in Indian WRA 
 

In order to define the risk of dietary inadequacy of iron, EAR is applied (for details, refer 
chapter-2; section 2.3) to the distribution of iron intake in the population. Either probability 
approach or EAR cut-point method can be used to assess dietary iron inadequacy. The use of RDA 
in estimating inadequate intake of iron in population is inappropriate as RDA is the intake level that 
exceeds the requirements of the large population and meant to define the requirement of an 
individual.  

 

Ghosh et al7 have recently analyzed the risk of dietary iron inadequacy among Indian WRA. 
To estimate the risk of inadequate intake of iron among WRA, nationally representative survey data 
from NSSO were considered33. The quantities of different foods purchased by a household were 
converted to nutrients of interest using the Indian food composition tables34 and adjusted for the 
number of members in the household, to obtain the daily per capita iron intake. The maximum 
likelihood estimation (MLE) technique was applied to estimate the appropriate parametric 
distribution of usual intake of dietary iron for each state and union territory. The distribution of 
population risk of inadequate intake of iron was derived by using the probability approach, using 
the EAR of 15 mg/d7. The interquartile range of the risk lay between approximately 48% to 78%. 
 
Validity of factorial method to estimate EAR in WRA 
 

To validate the present estimate of EAR, the risk of inadequate dietary iron was estimated by 
the probability approach and the EAR estimated here, and compared with biomarker-based (α-
glycoprotein and C-reactive protein-adjusted serum ferritin) measurements of iron deficiency in 
WRA. In a recently conducted survey in a third of the districts in Uttar Pradesh (UP)35, the 
prevalence of iron deficiency was 51% in WRA, which compared well with the present new 
estimate of the risk of dietary iron inadequacy of 42% in all districts in UP7. 

171 
 



9.3.2  Pregnancy 
 

Iron requirements during pregnancy were calculated using factorial method. During 
pregnancy, iron is required to meet the basal iron loss, iron deposited in fetus and related tissues and 
iron utilized in expansion in hemoglobin mass. Since there is no menstrual blood loss, the iron loss 
due to menstruation was not included.  

Table 9.2: Additional iron requirement during pregnancy 
 

Iron requirement during entire 
Compartments pregnancy (mg) 

10 kg GWG 12 kg GWG 
Foetus 179.3±43.6 mg 179.3±43.6 mg 
Expansion of maternal red cell mass 246.1±14.3 mg 295.3±17.2 mg 
Total 425±45.9 mg 474.6±46.9 mg 

GWG - Gestational Weight Gain 
Blood lost during parturition considered to be taken care of by the contraction of maternal red cell 
mass and therefore not accounted for.  
 

Based on the available data36,37 for Indian women, the additional iron required during the 
entire pregnancy period (includes requirement for fetus + expansion of maternal red cell mass) for 
Indian women having a pre-pregnancy body weight of 55 kg (CV=15.6%) and considering a 
gestational weight gain of 10 and 12 kg is provided in Table 9.2. A detailed derivation is given in 
Table 9.3. Total iron required per day during the three trimesters is given in Table 9.4. 

 

Table 9.3: Iron requirement during pregnancy and for trimesters:                                                  
basis and detailed calculation 

 

Mid-
Body Basal Blood volume 

trimester Fetal growthd 

weighta lossb Total 
Trimester  expansionc 

weight gain (mg/d) (mg/d) 
(kg) (mg/d) (mg/d) 

(kg) 

For 10 kg total weight gain (CV of weight=5.8%) 

First 1.8 56.6 0.79 0.88 0.64 2.31 

Second 5.3 60.3 0.84 0.88 0.64 2.36 

Third 8.6 63.6 0.89 0.88 0.64 2.41 

For 12 kg total weight gain (CV of weight=5.8%) 

First 2.1 57.1 0.80 1.05 0.64 2.49 

Second 6.3 61.3 0.86 1.05 0.64 2.55 

Third 10.4 65.4 0.91 1.05 0.64 2.61 

aPre-pregnancy weight 55 kg 
bBasal loss – 14 µg/ kg 
cBlood volume expansion: at the rate of 66ml / kg weight gain, Hb concentration 110 g/L and iron content 

of 3.47 mg/ g of Hb 
dBased on the reported fetal iron35 

 
 

172 
 



9.2.3  Lactation 
 Table 9.4: Iron requirement during 

Iron requirement during lactation is the sum pregnancy (trimester-wise) 
of the requirement of the mother and that required 
for making up the iron lost in breast milk. Since Requirement (mg/d) 

there is amenorrhea during lactation, only Trimester 10 kg GWG 12 kg GWG 

requirement beyond loss due to breast milk is due EAR RDA EAR RDA 
to the basal loss, which will be same as in the First 28.9 36.5 31.2 38.9 
adult woman, i.e., 14 µg/ kg/d.  Second 29.5 37.5 31.9 40.0 

 Third 30.1 38.4 32.6 41.1 
According to a study conducted in India38,39, 

iron content of breast milk from the study was 14 
Table 9.5: Optimum haemoglobin 

moles/L or 0.78 mg/L. Assuming average milk 
concentration for different age and gender 

volume is around 700 ml/d, the amount of iron 
groups43 

needed works out to be around 0.5 mg/d.  
 

The iron content of breast milk was Group Haemoglobin  

combined with basal iron loss from WRA to g/L 

arrive at physiological requirement for iron. This 
Children 0.5-5 y >110 

requirement was then adjusted to 8% iron 
absorption to arrive at an EAR of 15.97 mg/d Children aged 5-11 y >115 
(Table 9.6).  Children aged 12-13 y >120 
 

9.3.4  Infants and children 
 

The estimates of iron requirement for children and also for adolescent was analyzed by Ghosh 
et al40. The physiological requirement for iron during infant and children was estimated using a 
factorial method. It was based on a) replacing the basal iron lost from the body and b) providing 
additional iron required for growth and storage (for increased mass of hemoglobin, non-storage 
tissue iron deposition and iron storage). The addition of mean values of these factors yielded the 
average physiological requirement of iron that must be absorbed into the body. The EAR was then 
derived after adjusting the physiological requirement for the bioavailability of dietary iron. To 
derive the RDA, the variance of each of the factors noted above were also estimated to provide a 
summed variance that allowed for the determination of the 97.5th percentile of the distribution of 
requirements. 

 

The distribution of basal loss was assessed. The weight standardized basal iron loss reported 
in adult men from Seattle, Venezuela and South African Indians was used13, since data on basal iron 
loss were not available for children. There is no reason to consider that iron losses, standardized for 
body weight, would be different in children. The mean basal loss of iron was 14 µg/kg body 
weight/d with a standard deviation (SD) of 4.1 µg/kg body weight/d. 

 

Second, the increase in Hb mass was calculated as the product of the annual increase in blood 
volume, Hb concentration and the iron content of Hb. To estimate the increment of blood volume, 
sex- and age-specific blood volume data were extracted for children from earlier studies41,42, and 
regressed on age, ignoring sex for children <10y, since sexual dimorphism before adolescence is 
likely to be low. The specific average requirement of iron due to the increase in blood volume for 
any given age was derived by multiplying it into the minimum required Hb concentration at that age 
to be classified as non-anemic, and the iron content in Hb. The minimum Hb concentration was 
taken as provided in Table 9.5 and the iron content of Hb was assumed to be 3.39 mg/g28. 

 

 Third, the non-storage tissue iron was calculated as the product of weight gain/d and iron 
deposited within that weight gain. The mean weight gain/d and its variance were estimated from 

173 
 



annual body weights as described above and converting the yearly change of weight (mean and 
variance) to a daily change. The value for non-storage tissue iron deposition in the weight gain, for 
children up to 9y, was assumed to be 5 mg/kg. This was calculated as the product of the total body 
iron content (38 mg/kg) in children aged 1-9y44 and the proportion of this total body iron content, 
which is non-storage content, and assumed to be 14%45. 

 

 Fourth, the mean daily requirement for storage iron for children and adolescents was 
calculated based on the assumption that 12% of the increment in tissue iron deposition and Hb mass 
enters into body storage27.  

 

 The values for each factor were summed to arrive at the distribution of the physiological 
requirement. Finally, estimates for the EAR in young children and adolescent boys were obtained 
by adjusting this value for a bioavailability from cereal-based meals, of 15% for infants (6-12 
months) and 6% for children aged 1-9y46. The physiological requirement, EAR and RDA is 
provided in Table 9.6. 
 

9.3.5  Adolescents 
 

In case of adolescents, the iron requirement was calculated as described for children. 
However, for adolescent girls, additional iron lost due to blood loss in menstruation was considered.  

  

First, for younger children, the basal iron loss was estimated from weight standardized basal 
iron loss reported in adult men from Seattle, Venezuela and South African Indians13.  

 

Second, the increase in Hb mass was calculated as the product of the annual increase in blood 
volume, Hb concentration and the iron content of Hb. To estimate the increment of blood volume, 
sex- and age-specific blood volume data were extracted for children from earlier studies41,42, and 
regressed on age. For adolescents, sex-specific regression coefficients were estimated and applied 
in subsequent equations. The specific average requirement of iron due to the increase in blood 
volume for any given age was derived by multiplying it into the minimum required Hb 
concentration at that age to be classified as non-anemic, and the iron content in Hb. The minimum 
Hb concentration was taken as provided in Table 9.5 and the iron content of Hb was assumed to be 
3.39 mg/g28.  

  

Third, the non-storage tissue iron was calculated as the product of weight gain/d and iron 
deposited within that weight gain. The mean weight gain/d and its variance were estimated from 
annual body weights as described above and converting the yearly change of weight (mean and 
variance) to a daily change. From 10y onward, since muscle development is significant, the muscle 
content of iron was taken to represent non-storage tissue iron deposition (as myoglobin). This has 
been found to be 26 mg/kg and independent of the dietary iron intake47. It was assumed that 40% of 
the increment in body weight is due to skeletal muscle growth48, since there is no evidence to 
suggest that in normal children, the proportion of muscle mass in the body is lower than elsewhere 
in the world. A value of 10 mg/kg body weight increase was assumed for non-storage tissue iron 
deposition in adolescents.  

 

Fourth, the mean daily requirement for storage iron for children and adolescents was 
calculated based on the assumption that 12% of the increment in tissue iron deposition and Hb mass 
enters into body storage27.  

  

Finally, for adolescent girls, additional iron is required to replace that lost during 
menstruation. Studies reporting blood and iron loss during menstruation among women (15-50y) 
were included in this estimation, as it has been concluded that menstrual blood loss during 
adolescence does not differ from that of WRA group49. Iron loss was calculated as the product of 
the daily blood loss over a 28d cycle, the hemoglobin (Hb) concentration and the iron content of 

174 
 



Hb. Details on the calculation are provided in section 9.3.1. Since the menstrual iron loss 
distribution was positively skewed, its probability distribution was taken as lognormal (see section 
9.3.1 for details). 

 

The values for each factor were summed to arrive at the distribution of the physiological 
requirement. For adolescent girls, in whom the menstrual iron loss was positively skewed, a 
convolution of normal and log-normal was obtained as the probability distribution of the 
physiological requirement. As there is no close form available for this convolution, a Monte-Carlo 
simulation technique was applied to obtain the distribution of the total physiological iron 
requirement.   

 

Estimates for the EAR in adolescent were obtained by adjusting the physiological iron 
requirement for diet bioavailability from cereal-based meals of 8% for adolescent children aged 10-
17y32. The RDA (97.5th percentile) was estimated from the pooled variance of the factors, assuming 
a normal distribution. The physiological requirement, EAR and RDA for adolescent is presented in 
Table 9.6.  
 

Validity of factorial method to estimate EAR in children and adolescents 
 

The current estimate of EAR for children and adolescents were validated by estimating the 
risk of inadequate dietary iron was estimated using current EAR and compared with biomarker-
based (α-glycoprotein and C-reactive protein–adjusted serum ferritin) measurements of iron 
deficiency in children 1-3y. The risk of dietary iron inadequacy was determined to be 49%. In 
another recent study on <5y old children in 25 districts of UP35, the prevalence of iron deficiency 
(based on AGP and CRP corrected serum ferritin levels), was 62%, which is reasonably close to the 
calculated prevalence of risk of dietary inadequacy (49%) in a similar population. Similarly, the 
prevalence of risk of dietary iron inadequacy was 54% for adolescent girls from UP, while the 
prevalence of iron deficiency based on serum ferritin was 41% (in UP and Bihar girls residing in the 
slums of Delhi)50. Also, the sensitivity analyses were also performed to evaluate differences in the 
estimate of the physiological iron requirement and the EAR when the assumptions used were varied 
by 10%. 
 

9.4  Tolerable Upper Level 
 

The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (TUL) is the highest level of daily nutrient intake that is 
likely to pose no risk of adverse health effects for almost all individuals (refer chapter-2 for details). 
Acute toxicity can occur due to overdose of supplemental iron and symptoms may include gastric 
upset, constipation, nausea, abdominal pain and vomiting27,54. These symptoms can be observed 
with the doses between 20 and 60 mg/kg. Many studies have been done on children55,56 and 
pregnant women57 who reported adverse effects of iron supplementation. The studies showed no 
gastro-intestinal (GI) side effects with supplementation of 20 to 30 mg/d iron in children, while 100 
to 200 mg/d in pregnant women was associated with GI side effects such as abdominal pain, severe 
nausea, vomiting, constipation and diarrhoea. High intakes of iron supplements have also been 
associated with reduced zinc absorption58. In severe cases (e.g., one-time ingestions of 60 mg/kg), 
overdoses of iron can lead to multisystem organ failure, coma, convulsions, and even death59. Most 
of the studies reporting adverse events failed to have a control group. According to Institute of 
Medicine (IOM), the TUL was based on the level at which lowest adverse events were observed (60 
mg/d)27 and an extrapolation was done using uncertainty factor of 1.5 to arrive at level which shows 
no adverse effect. In case of infants and children, this uncertainty factor was 1. Using 60 mg/d level 
and an uncertainty factor, the TUL was set at 40 mg/d for infants and children up to 13 y, while for 
adolescents (14-18 y) and adults, the TUL was set at 45 mg/d (Table 9.7). 

 
 

175 
 



Table 9.6: Current EAR and RDA of iron for various physiological groups  
 

Body Physiological Iron Absorption ICMR 2020b 

Category / Age weighta Requirement assumed 
(kg) (mg) % EAR (mg/d) RDA (mg/d) 

Men 65.0 0.91 8 11 19 
Women (WRA) 55.0 1.20 8 15 29 
Pregnant women 55.0c 2.55 8 30 38 
Lactating women 

55.0 1.28 8 16 23 
(0-6m) 
Infants               0-6 m 5.4 -- -- -- -- 
                          6-12 m 8.5 0.33 15d 2 3 

1-3 y 11.7 0.38 6 6 8 
Children 4-6 y 18.3 0.49 6 8 11 

7-9 y 25.3 0.61 6 10 15 
 Adolescents 

Boys 10-12 y 34 .9 0.93 8 12 16 
Girls 10-12 y 36.4 1.27 8 16 28 
Boys 13-15 y 50.5 1.23 8 15 22 
Girls 13-15 y 49.6 1.39 8 17 30 
Boys 16-18 y 64.4 1.45 8 18 26 
Girls 16-18 y 55.7 1.46 8 18 32 

 

aReference body weights for Indians in various physiological groups14,51,52 

bEAR and RDA are rounded off to whole number; 
cPre-pregnancy weight; EAR and RDA is given as average of all 3 trimester for a woman having 12kg GWG 
(refer Table 9.4 for details); 
dIron absorption reported for infants was 15%53. 
 

Table 9.7: Summary of EAR and RDA for Iron 

Body weight EAR RDA TUL 
Age category 

kg mg/day mg/day mg/day 
Adult Men 65.0 11 19 45 
Adult Women 55.0 15 29 45 
Pregnant 55.0a 32 40 45 
Lactating 55.0 16 23 45 
Infants (0-6 mo) 5.4 -- -- 40 
Infants (6-12 mo) 8.5 2 (AI) 3 (AI) 40 
Children (1-3y) 12.9 6 8 40 
Children (4-6y) 18.3 8 11 40 
Children (7-9y) 25.3 10 15 40 
Boys (10-12y) 34.9 12 16 40 
Girls (10-12y) 36.4 16 28 40 
Boys (13-15y) 50.5 15 22 45 
Girls (13-15y) 49.6 17 30 45 
Boys (16-18y) 64.4 18 26 45 
Girls (16-18y) 55.7 18 32 45 

aPre-pregnancy weight; EAR and RDA is given as average of all 3 trimester for a woman having 
12kg GWG (refer Table 9.4 for details)  

176 
 



References 

1. International Institute for Population Sciences. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3), 2005-06: 
India. International Institute for Population Sciences; 2007. 

2. International Institute of Population Science. National Family Health Survey India (NFHS-4), 2015-
2016: International Institute for Population Sciences; 2016.   

3. Gomber S, Kumar S, Rusia U, Gupta P. Prevalence & etiology of nutritional anaemias in early childhood 
in an urban slum. Indian Journal of Medical Research. 1998 Jun 1; 107:269. 

4. Verma M, Chhatwal J, Kaur G. Prevalence of anemia among urban school children of Punjab. Indian 
Pediatrics. 1998 Dec; 35(12):1181-6. 

5. Raman L, Pawashe AB, Ramalakshmi BA. Iron nutritional status of preschool children. The Indian 
Journal of Pediatrics. 1992 Mar 1; 59(2):209-12. 

6. Vasanthi G, Fawashe AB, Susie H, Sujatha T, Raman L. Iron nutritional status of adolescent girls from 
rural area and urban slum. Hemoglobin (g/dl). 1994 Feb 1; 12(2.25):13-0. 

7. Ghosh S, Sinha S, Thomas T, Sachdev HS, Kurpad AV. Revisiting dietary iron requirement and 
deficiency in Indian women: Implications for food iron fortification and supplementation. The Journal of 
nutrition. 2019 Mar 1; 149(3):366-71. 

8. Bhaskaram P, Nair KM, Balakrishna N, Ravinder P, Sesikeran B. Serum transferrin receptor in children 
with respiratory infections. European journal of clinical nutrition. 2003 Jan; 57(1):75-80. 

9. Nair KM, Bhaskaram P, Balakrishna N, Ravinder P, Sesikeran B. Response of haemoglobin, serum 
ferritin and transferrin receptor during iron supplementation in pregnancy. Nutrition 2004; 20:896–899. 

10. Rusia U, Flowers C, Madan N, Agarwal N, Sood SK, Sikka M. Serum transferrin receptors in detection 
of iron deficiency in pregnancy. Annals of Hematology. 1999 Aug 1; 78(8):358-63. 

11. Sivakumar B, Nair KM, Sreeramulu D, Suryanarayana P, Ravinder P, Shatrugna V, Kumar PA, 
Raghunath M, Rao VV, Balakrishna N, Kumar PU. Effect of micronutrient supplement on health and 
nutritional status of schoolchildren: biochemical status. Nutrition. 2006 Jan 1; 22(1):S15-25. 

12. ICMR, Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A report of the expert 
group of the Indian Council of Medical Research National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad, 2010. 

13. Green R, Charlton R, Seftel H, Bothwell T, Mayet F, Adams B, Finch C, Layrisse M. Body iron 
excretion in man: a collaborative study. The American journal of medicine. 1968 Sep 1; 45(3):336-53. 

14. NNMB. (NNMB). Diet and nutritional status of urban population in India and prevalence of obesity, 
hypertension, diabetes and hyperlipidemia in urban men and women. Technical Report No. 27, National 
Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, National Institute of Nutrition, ICMR, Hyderabad, 2016. 

15. Rao N, Vijayasarathy C, Prabhavathi T. Iron absorption from habitual diets of Indians studied by the 
extrinsic tag technique. Indian journal of medical research. 1983. 

16. Barer AP, Fowler WM. The blood loss during normal menstruation. American Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology. 1936 Jun 1; 31(6):979-86. 

17. Hallberg L, Nilsson L. Determination of menstrual blood loss. Scandinavian Journal of Clinical and 
Laboratory Investigation. 1964 Jan 1; 16(2):244-8. 

18. Apte SV, Venkatachalam PS. Iron losses in Indian women. Indian journal of Medical research. 1963; 
51:958-62. 

19. Hytten FE, Cheyne GA, Klopper AI. Iron loss at menstruation. BJOG: An International Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 1964 Apr; 71(2):255-9. 

20. Hallberg L, Hôgdahl AM, Nilsson L, Rybo G. Menstrual blood loss–a population study: variation at 
different ages and attempts to define normality. Acta obstetricia et gynecologica Scandinavica. 1966 Jan 
1;45(3):320-51. 

177 
 



21. Hallberg L, Hogdahl AM, Nilsson L, Rybo G. Menstrual blood loss and iron deficiency. Acta medica 
scandinavica. 1966; 180:639-50. 

22. Cole SK, Billewicz WZ, Thomson AM. Sources of variation in menstrual blood loss. The Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology of British Commonwealth.1971; 75:933-9. 

23. Hefnawi F, El-Zayat AF, Yacout MM. Physiologic Studies of Menstrual Blood Loss. International 
Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics. 1980; 17:343–52.  

24. Cheong RL, Kuizon MD, Tajaon RT. Menstrual blood loss and iron nutrition in Filipino women. 
Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public Health 1991; 22(4):595–604. 

25. Harvey LJ, Armah CN, Dainty JR, Foxall RJ, Lewis DJ, Langford NJ, Fairweather-Tait SJ. Impact of 
menstrual blood loss and diet on iron deficiency among women in the UK. British Journal of Nutrition. 
2005; 94(04):557-64. 

26. Beaton GH, Thein M, Milne H, Veen MJ. Iron requirements of menstruating women. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition. 1970; 23:275-83. 

27. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A vitamin K, arsenic, boron, chromium, 
copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and zinc: A report of the Panel 
on Micronutrients. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; Institute of Medicine; 2001. 

28. Smith NJ, Rios E. Iron metabolism and iron deficiency in infancy and childhood. Advances in Pediatrics. 
1974; 21:239–280. 

29. Thankachan P, Walczyk T, Muthayya S, Kurpad AV, Hurrell RF. Iron absorption in young Indian 
women: the interaction of iron status with the influence of tea and ascorbic acid. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 2008; 87(4):881-6. 

30. Kalasuramath S, Kurpad AV, Thankachan P. Effect of iron status on iron absorption in different habitual 
meals in young south Indian women. Indian Journal Medical Research. 2013; 137(2):324. 

31. Herter-Aeberli I, Thankachan P, Bose B, Kurpad AV. Increased risk of iron deficiency and reduced iron 
absorption but no difference in zinc, vitamin A or B-vitamin status in obese women in India. European 
Journal of Nutrition. 2016; 55(8):2411-21. 

32. Nair KM, Brahmam GN, Radhika MS, Dripta RC, Ravinder P, Balakrishna N, Chen Z, Hawthorne KM, 
Abrams SA. Inclusion of Guava Enhances Non-Heme Iron Bioavailability but Not Fractional Zinc 
Absorption from a Rice-Based Meal in Adolescents. Journal of Nutrition. 2013; 143(6):852-8. 

33. National Sample Survey Office. Nutritional Intake in India, 2011-12. 560, NSS 68th Round. National 
Statistical Organization. Government of India. 2014. 

34. Longvah T, Ananthan R, Bhaskarachary T, Venkaiah K. Indian food composition tables. National 
Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research Hyderabad, Telengana, India; 2017. 

35. Larson L, Thomas T, Kurpad A, Martorell R, Hoddinott J, Swaminathan S, et al.(P12-065) Anemia in 
women and children in Uttar Pradesh: a path analysis of the associations between nutritional, 
environmental, infectious, and genetic determinants. Poster presented in Annual meeting of American 
Society of Nutrition, 2018. Available from: https://www.eventscribe.com/2018/posters/ASNScientific/ 
SplitViewer.asp. 

36. Bothwell HT, Robert WC, Cook JD and Finch CA. Iron metabolism in man. Blackwell Scientific 
Publications, London. 1979, Chapter 1: 20-21, 

37. Apte SV, Iyengar L. Composition of the human foetus. British journal of Nutrition. 1972 Mar; 
27(2):305-12. 

38. Neville MC, Keller R, SeacatJ, Lutes V, Neifert M, Casey C, Allen J, Archer P. Studies in human 
lactation: milk volumes in lactating women during the onset of lactation and full lactation. Am J Clinical 
Nutrition. 1988; 48: 1375-1386. 

178 
 



39. Kumar A, Rai AK, Basu S, Dash D and Singh JS. Cord blood and breast milk iron status in maternal 
anaemia. Pediatrics 2008; 121:e673-e677. 

40. Ghosh S, Sinha S, Shivakumar N, Thomas T, Sachdev HS, Kurpad AV. Daily iron requirements in 
healthy Indian children and adolescents. Indian pediatrics. 2019 Jul 1; 56(7):551-5. 

41. Morse M, Cassels DE, Schlutz FW. Blood volumes of normal children. American Journal of Physiology. 
1947; 151(2):448-58. 

42. Russell SJ. Blood volume studies in healthy children. Archives of disease in childhood. 1949 Jun; 
24(118):88. 

43. WHO. Assessment, Prevention and Control – A Guide for Programme Managers. 2001. 

44. Poskitt PME.  Mineral deficiencies. In: Practical Pediatric Nutrition. London: Butterworths & Co.; 1988. 
p 115. 

45. Domellof M, Hernell O. Iron-deficiency anaemia during the first two years of life. Scandanavian Journal 
of Nutrition. 2001; 46(1): 20-30. 

46. Kodkany BS, Bellad RM, Mahantshetti NS, Westcott JE, Krebs NF, Kemp JF, et al. Biofortification of 
Pearl Millet with Iron and Zinc in a Randomized Controlled Trial Increases Absorption of These 
Minerals above Physiologic Requirements in Young Children. Journal of Nutrition. 2013; 143(9):1489-
93. 

47. Torrance JD, Charlton RW, Schmaman A, Lynch SR, Bothwell TH. Storage iron in muscle. J Clinical 
Pathology. 1968; 21: 495–500. 

48. McCarthy HD, Samani‐Radia D, Jebb SA, Prentice AM. Skeletal muscle mass reference curves for 
children and adolescents. Pediatric obesity. 2014 Aug; 9(4):249-59. 

49. Hallberg, L. Iron requirements, iron balance and iron deficiency in menstruating and pregnant women. 
In: Hallberg L & Asp N G. editors. Iron Nutrition in Health and Disease. John Libbey & Co.; 1996. p 
165–182. 

50. Bansal PG, Toteja GS, Bhatia N, Vikram NK, Siddhu A, Garg AK, Roy AK. Deficiencies of Serum 
Ferritin and Vitamin B. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 2015; 85(1-2):14-22.  

51. World Health Organization. WHO child growth standards - Length/height-for-age, weight-for-age, 
weight-for-length, weight-for-height and body mass index-for-age – Methods and development; 2006. 

52. World Health Organization. Development of a WHO growth reference for school-aged children and 
adolescents; 2007. 

53. Domellöf M, Lönnerdal B, Abrams SA and Hernell O. Iron absorption in breast-fed infants: effects of 
age, iron status, iron supplements, and complementary foods. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2002; 76:198–204. 

54. Aggett PJ. Iron. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th  
ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:506-20. 

55. Burman D. Haemoglobin levels in normal infants aged 3 to 24 months, and the effect of iron. Archives 
of disease in childhood. 1972 Apr 1; 47(252):261-71. 

56. Farquhar JD. Iron supplementation during first year of life. American Journal of Diseases of Children. 
1963 Aug 1; 106(2):201-6. 

57. Rybo G, Sölvell L. Side‐effect studies on a new sustained release iron preparation. Scandinavian journal 
of haematology. 1971 Aug; 8(4):257-64. 

58. Solomons NW. Competitive interaction of iron and zinc in the diet: consequences for human nutrition. 
Journal of Nutrition. 1986; 116:927-35. 

59. Chang TP, Rangan C. Iron poisoning: a literature-based review of epidemiology, diagnosis, and 
management. Pediatric emergency care. 2011 Oct 1; 27(10):978-85. 

179 
 



10. ZINC REQUIREMENTS 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Zinc is an essential micronutrient for animal and human health. Adequate intake of Zn has 
been found necessary to enhance physical growth and decrease morbidity and mortality among 
children. Supplementation with Zn was found to lower frequency and severity of infections like 
diarrhoea, pneumonia, and reduce mortality1. It is estimated that globally 2 billion people are at risk 
of zinc deficiency. Zinc supplementation has been shown to improve linear growth in stunted and 
underweight children at young age, but its impact in low and middle income settings remains 
uncertain2,3.  WHO/UNICEF recommends zinc supplementation during diarrhoeal infection and for 
treatment of severe malnutrition4. Zinc is considered a type-2 nutrient whose deficiency leads to 
conservation of nutrient in the body at the expense of growth, and thus clinical symptoms such as 
reduced growth precedes the decline in blood zinc levels5.  
 
10.1 Zinc Homeostasis  
 

Zinc is ubiquitously present in all tissues, with highest levels found in muscle and bone 
followed by liver. The whole-body zinc content is stable over a wide range of dietary zinc intakes 
indicating efficient homeostatic mechanisms6,7. Homeostatic regulation of zinc metabolism is 
orchestrated through increased absorption during deficiency and excretion during repletion8. Zinc 
absorption and excretion in the gastrointestinal tract are the primary mechanisms for maintaining 
zinc homeostasis. Zinc absorption takes place throughout the small intestine with the highest rate of 
absorption occurring in the jejunum, but duodenum contributes to the maximal zinc absorption 
owing to its exposure to higher zinc concentration after a meal7. Thereafter, excess endogenous zinc 
can be secreted into the intestine through pancreatic juice and excreted in faeces6. The balance of 
intestinal absorption and endogenous losses of zinc through faeces are thus two important pathways 
that regulate the zinc homeostasis. During zinc deficiency or limited dietary zinc intakes, faecal 
zinc excretion falls with concurrent increase in intestinal absorption, thus conserves the zinc 
concentration in the tissues/plasma5,6. On the other hand, during zinc excess, faecal zinc excretion 
increases while the absorption is not affected. Therefore, an exquisite balance of endogenous losses 
regulates the whole-body zinc homeostasis, such that the plasma zinc levels remain at steady state 
except under severe zinc deficiency6,7.  
 

In addition to the active intestinal excretion, zinc is also excreted through sweat, urine, hair, 
seminal fluid and menstrual cycle6,9-11. Systematic zinc repletion/depletion studies in humans 
demonstrated that faecal zinc excretion increases as a function of dietary zinc intake and/or 
absorbed zinc but the losses in urine and sweat remained constant over a wide-range of zinc 
intakes5,6,12. Therefore, entero-pancreatic axis is the major pathway of zinc excretion, and regulates 
the whole body zinc homeostasis. 
 
10.2 Zinc Deficiency in India 
 

Zinc deficiency is manifested with symptoms like growth failure, depressed immunity, 
anorexia, diarrhoea, altered skeletal function and reproductive failure. Diagnosis of zinc deficiency 
is more difficult because of the nonspecific clinical features. International zinc consultative group 
(IZiNCG) suggested that low serum zinc (<70 µg/dL) as suitable indicator to assess the prevalence 
of zinc deficiency at the population level, though it cannot be a diagnostic tool for individuals. 
Studies in different physiological groups indicated that the prevalence of serum zinc deficiency in 

180 
 



India is >20%, which indicates a public health significance13-20. Recent comprehensive national 
nutrition survey (CNNS 2016-18)21 conducted by UNICEF-MoHFW revealed that 18.9% (1-4y), 
16.8 % (5-9 y) and 31.7% (10-19 y) children in India are zinc deficient, based on low serum zinc 
levels. Girls tended to show higher prevalence of deficiency compared to boys at an early age (18% 
vs. 20.1%) but the trend reversed at adolescence (35.1% vs. 28.4%). Considering the high 
prevalence of stunting, anemia, high dietary phytate intakes together with observed high prevalence 
of serum zinc deficiency among Indian children and adolescents, suggest that Indian population is 
at risk of zinc deficiency, particularly adolescents.  
 
10. 3 Changes from the ICMR 2010 recommendation for Zinc requirement:  

The following changes were made:  
a. The RDA 2010 provides only a single value of RDA and is adopted from WHO/FAO 

recommendation, and did not provide EAR. Since EAR is more relevant in population 
context, an effort was made to systematically derive the EAR and RDA using factorial 
approach. 

b. The factorial computation of zinc requirements was done considering all the average losses 
of zinc through bodily fluids and additional requirements due to growth (tissue and blood 
volume expansion), lactation and pregnancy needs. The RDA was then derived by 
multiplying the EAR with a factor of 1.2 (10% CV). 
 

10.4 Strategy adopted for deriving Dietary requirements EAR and RDA: The EAR and RDA 
were derived by factorial approach that considered losses in 1. Sweat 2. Urine 3. Seminal fluid 4. 
Menstrual losses 5. Endogenous intestinal zinc excretion 6. Additional requirements during 
pregnancy, lactation and growth, all of which are summed and adjusted for bioavailability to derive 
estimated average requirements. The RDA was then computed by multiplying the EAR with a 
factor of 1.2 (assuming 10% CV). 
 
10.4.1 Urinary zinc losses: A thorough literature search was conducted in Pubmed (search terms: 
zinc loss, zinc excretion, urinary zinc), out of which 20 studies that reported the sweat and urinary 
zinc loss/day of men11,12,22-37 and 10 studies reported the urinary loss in non-pregnant 
adultwomen10,11,27,37-41. The mean and SD of urinary zinc loss/day reported in these studies was 
pooled separately for men and women. The mean urinary loss for men was 614±238 µg/day for 
men and 443±282 µg/day. Except under severe depletion, both sweat and urinary zinc losses are 
found to be constant, and thus these values are considered directly for the purpose of factorial 
computation5,12. 
 
10.4.2 Sweat zinc loss: Two studies reported the sweat zinc losses for men; 442.5±190 µg/day26 
and 163.42±39.41 µg/day23. The pooled mean±SD sweat loss for men was 275±122 µg/day. 
However, no data on sweat loss of zinc for women could be found, therefore, it is derived by 
dividing the men sweat loss with a factor of 0.86 to account for differences in surface area9, and 
amounts to 236±104 µg/day. 
 
10.4.3 Seminal zinc loss: Three studies reported the seminal zinc loss; 630±540 µg/day26, 
139.91±103 µg/day11 and111±10 µg/day24. Since the study by Baer et al., 1984, reported very high 
seminal zinc content it was not considered for computation. The mean seminal loss from other two 
studies was 125.52±65 µg/day. 
 
10.4.4 Menstrual loss: Only one study reported the zinc loss through the menstrual fluid10. This 
study found the loss of 60 g menstrual fluid on an average, per period; Menstrual fluid zinc 

181 
 



concentration averaged about 3 µg/g of fluid that accounts of 154 µg/period or 5 µg zinc loss per 
day. 
 

10.4.5 Bioavailability of zinc: Bioavailability of zinc is influenced by dietary phytic acid akin to 
iron. Two Indian studies measured the absorption of zinc in adolescents (girls 26.9%±6; boys 
32.5%±16.6) and young children (17%±8) from rice and millet based diets respectively42,43. The 
bioavailability of zinc from whole wheat flour studied in Mexican adult women (20%±5) was also 
considered44. The mean and SD of these studies were pooled to derive a common bioavailability 
factor of 23.57%±9.85, and is rounded off to 23% for computation of requirements. 
 

A study in young (20-40 years) and elderly (70-80 y) Caucasian men found no differences in 
bioavailability of zinc from either high or low phyate meals45,46. Similarly no effect of age was 
found on the bioavailability of zinc either in young (22-24 y) or elderly (66-75 y) women in 
Korea46. The absorption of zinc was higher in adolescent’s girls or women compared to boys and 
men, but the difference in pooled analysis of these studies was only 2-3%47. In contrary, studies in 
India showed a trend of higher absorption in adolescent boys compared to girls, but the results 
remained insignificant43. Based on these observations, 23% bioavailability was assumed across the 
all age/ gender groups. 
 

The absorption of zinc during pregnancy though showed a trend of increased absorption, the 
results remained insignificant48. In contrast, many studies that measured the zinc absorption during 
lactation reported a significant increase in zinc bioavailability48-50. The fractional zinc absorption 
zinc during lactation (25%, 7-9 weeks postpartum) was found to be higher compared to 
preconception (14%)49. A longitudinal study among Guatemalan women demonstrated increased 
fractional zinc absorption at 2nd trimester, at first two months of lactation followed by decline to 
basal levels at 6 months of lactation, but the extent of increase was higher in low phytate foods 
compared to habitual foods with higher phytic acid content51.  The fractional zinc absorption was 
22% at first trimester, 32% at 2nd trimester, 34% at 2 months of lactation and 26% at 6 months of 
lactation. Therefore, considering the high phytic acid content of cereal/pulse/millet based diets in 
India, a conservative estimate of 25% (23+2%) and 30% (23+7%) bioavailability were considered 
for pregnant and lactating women, respectively.  
 

10.4.6 Endogenous zinc excretion and total zinc losses in adult men, and women (WRA) and 
children: As described above, endogenous zinc excretion in to the faeces is the major route of zinc 
excretion from the body and thus is of immense importance for deriving dietary requirements. 
Endogenous zinc excretion is dependent on the absorbed zinc, therefore it is essential to establish a 
relationship between these two variables to derive a factor that represents an endogenous loss as a 
function of absorbed zinc. To derive this factor, literature search was conducted in Pubmed (search 
terms: zinc loss, endogenous zinc loss, endogenous zinc excretion), out of which 9 studies that 
reported the endogenous zinc loss and absorbed zinc for men11,12,25,28,36,52 and 3 studies for non-
pregnant adult women53,54 were identified for data extraction. The endogenous zinc excretion 
through intestine is assumed to be independent of gender, and thus the data was pooled. 
 

As shown in Figure 10.1, the endogenous zinc excretion as measured by isotope dilution 
studies is strongly associated with absorbed zinc (Slope 0.62, r2=0.69). Therefore we have summed 
the other mean losses of men (urinary, sweat and seminal losses) and women (urinary, sweat and 
menstrual losses), to the endogenous excretion and regressed over the intake. The intersection point 
of this line, with line of equity (absorbed zinc regressed over absorbed zinc) was then considered 
the absolute amount of zinc requirement which is 3.0 mg/day and 3.3 mg/day for adult women and 
men, respectively (Figure 10.1), which were then adjusted for mean body weight (65 kg) of all 
considered studies. This amounts to the absolute absorbed zinc requirements of 0.05 mg/kg body 
weight /day and 0.046 mg/kg body weight /day for adult men and women respectively55. The 

182 
 



absolute zinc requirement without seminal and menstrual losses was 0.04 mg/kg body weight/day, 
and is extrapolated to compute requirements of children. 

 
Figure 10.1: Endogenous and total loss of zinc as a function of absorbed zinc in adult men and 

women (WRA) 
 

6

5

4

3

2

1
1 2 3 4 5 6

Absorbed zinc (mg)  

The endogenous zinc excreted in to the faeces was regressed over absorbed zinc; the urinary, 
sweat, seminal and menstrual losses were then summed with endogenous excreted zinc and 
regressed over absorbed zinc for male (total loss in men) and female (WRA; total loss in women). 
The absorbed zinc level at the intersection of line of equity (regression line of absorbed vs excreted 
zinc) with male and female regression curves was considered absolute amount of zinc required/day. 
The absorbed zinc level of men without seminal losses was considered for computing zinc 
requirements of children.  
 
10.5 Zinc requirements 

10.5.1 Adult men and women (WRA) 
 

The absolute requirements of zinc derived from previous section (10.4.6), were then adjusted 
for body weights and 23% bioavailability, to arrive at 11 and 14.13 mg EAR for adult women 
(WRA) and men, respectively. The RDA was then derived by multiplying the respective EAR with 
1.2 to arrive at 16.69 and 13.2, respectively (Table 10.1). 
 

10.5.2  Zinc requirements of infants, children and adolescents 
 

The absolute zinc requirements of adults (without reproductive losses) was extrapolated to 
compute the requirements, after excluding the contribution of seminal loses. 0.04 mg/kg body 
weight/day obtained for adult men without seminal losses was extrapolated for computing the 
requirement of infants (6-12 months) and children (1-9 years). The respective adult male and female 
zinc requirements were extrapolated to compute the requirement of adolescents.  

183 
 

Zinc excretion (mg)



Table 10.1: EAR and RDA of zinc for various physiological groups and comparison between ICMR 2020 and 2010 
 

TUL 
Physiological ICMR IOM 2011 EFSA 2017 IZiNCG (IOM, 

Body Absorption ICMR  2020 
Zinc 2010 EAR-RDA (mg/day)d 2004d 2011&ICMR 

Category / Age weight assumed (mg/day) 
requirement 

(kg)a (mg/day) (mg/day)d  (mg/day) 2018) 
 (%) 

(mg/day) (mg/day) 
EAR RDAb RDA EAR-RDA EAR RDA TUL 

Men 65 3.25 23 14.1 17 12 9.4 - 11 12.7* ≥ 19y 19 40 
Women (WRA) 55 2.53 23 11.0 13.2 10 6.8 - 8 10.2* ≥ 19y 9 40 
Pregnant womenc 55 3.0 25 12.0   14.5 12 9.5 - 11 11.5* ≥ 19y 13 40 
Lactating women 

55 3.53 30 11.8 14.1 12 10.4 - 12 12.6* ≥ 19y 10 40 
(0-6m) 
Infants 
(0-6m) 5.8 - - - - - 2 (AI) -- -- -- 4 
6-12m 8.5 0.486 23 2.1 2.5 - 2.5 - 3 2.4 6-11m 5 5 
Children  
1-3 y 11.7 0.59 23 2.5 3.0 5 2.5 - 3 3.6 1-3y 3 7 
4-6 y 18.3 0.85 23 3.7 4.5 7 4 - 5 4.6 4-6y 5 12 (4-8yr) 
7-9y 25.3 1.13 23 4.9 5.9 8 4 - 5 6.2 7-8y 5 12 
Adolescents 
Boys 10-12 y 34.9 1.62 23 7.0 8.5 9 7 - 8 8.8 (11–14y) 9-13y 9 23 (9-13yr) 
Girls 10-12 y 36.4 1.64 23 7.1 8.5 9 7 - 8 8.9 (11–14y) 9-13y 9 23 (9-13yr) 
Boys 13-15 y 50.5 2.75 23 11.9 14.3 11 8.5 - 11  14-15y 14 34 
Girls 13-15 y 49.6 2.46 23 10.7 12.8 11 7.3 - 9  14-15y 11 34 
Boys 16-18 y 64.4 3.38 23 14.7 17.6 12 8.5 - 11 11.8(15–17y) 16-18y 14 34 
Girls 16-18 y 55.7 2.72 23 11.8 14.2 12 7.3 - 9 9.9 (15–17y) 16-18y 11 34 

 

aBody weight ICMR 2020 
bRDA was computed by multiplying EAR with a factor of 1.2. 
cPre-pregnancy weight; EAR and RDA is given as average of all 3 trimester for a women having 10 kg GWG (refer to Table 10.2) 
dHigh phyatate diets 

184 
 



The average blood volume expansion and tissue growth with age were adopted from recent 
computation for iron requirements56, the same is also adopted for computing infant requirements. 
The zinc requirements due to blood volume expansion were computed considering the average zinc 
content of whole blood (pooled for men and women) extracted from literature 5.74 µg/mL57. The 
zinc requirement for tissue growth was computed considering 20 µg/g tissue, as analyzed by 
chemical analysis9,58. 

10.5.3 Lactation requirements 

Breast milk zinc content varied depending on the duration of lactation. Four studies reported 
the breast milk concentration at different lactation periods in India59-62, but the study by Sazawal et 
al.,199662 is published as an abstract and reported median zinc levels, and thus is not considered 
further. The mean zinc levels in colostrum 4.66±5.55 µg/mL; transitional milk 3.61±3.79 µg/mL; 1-
3 months 1.95±0.47 µg/mL; 3-6 months 1.49±0.46; 6-12 months 1.28±0.0.82 µg/mL. Since breast 
milk zinc levels are declined rapidly during the first one month, the average breast milk content 
(1.57 µg/mL) of zinc during 1-3 and 3-6 months of lactation was considered. Assuming average 
milk volume is around 700 mL/d, the amount of zinc needed works out to be 1.09 mg/day, rounded 
off to 1 mg/day. Therefore, an additional 1 mg/day zinc was added to the absolute zinc requirement 
and adjusted for bioavailability for computing the requirements. 

10.5.4 Pregnancy requirements 

During pregnancy, zinc is required to meet the basal iron loss, iron deposited in foetus, tissues 
and blood volume expansion.  The zinc requirements for gestational weight gain of 10 and 12 kg at 
different gestational ages were computed, and are essentially adopted from computation of iron 
requirements (Chapter 9). Briefly, the absolute requirement of 0.04 mg/kg bodyweight/day (without 
seminal or menstrual loss), blood volume expansion (66 mL/kg weight gain) and actual weight gain 
(actual weight gain-blood weight), were computed for both 10 and 12 kg gestational weight gain 
(Table 10.2). The additional zinc requirements due to blood volume expansion were computed 
considering 5.75 µg/mL, 20 µg/g Zn in blood and tissue, respectively. 

Table 10.2: Zinc requirement during pregnancy and for trimesters 

Mid- Blood 
Body Basal Foetal 

Tri trimester ume f 

weighta lossb vol
 growthd Total EARe RDA

mester weight expansionc (mg/d) (mg/d) (mg/d) 
(kg) (mg/d) (mg/d) 

gain (kg) (mg/d) 

For 10 kg total weight gain 

First 1.8 56.6 2.264 0.0076 0.37 2.64 10.56 12.67 
Second 5.3 60.3 2.412 0.0147 0.72 3.15 12.6 15.12 
Third 8.6 63.6 2.554 0.014 0.68 3.25 13.0 15.6 
For 12 kg total weight gain 
First 2.1 57.1 2.284 0.0075 0.37 2.66 10.64 12.76 
Second 6.3 61.3 2.452 0.0175 0.87 3.34 13.36 16.0 
Third 10.4 65.4 2.616 0.071 0.85 3.48 13.92 16.7 

aPre-pregnancy weight 55 kg 
bBasal loss – 0.046 µg/kg body weight 
cBlood zinc computed assuming 66 mL blood/kg body weight gain and 5.75 µg Zn/mL blood 
dThe zinc content 20 µg/g of tissue is considered  
eEAR computed assuming 23% bioavailability 

fRDA was computed by multiplying EAR with a factor of 1.2 
 

185 
 



References 

1. Yakoob MY, Theodoratou E, Jabeen A, et al. Preventive zinc supplementation in developing countries: 
impact on mortality and morbidity due to diarrhea, pneumonia and malaria. BMC Public Health 2011; 11 
Suppl 3(Suppl 3): S23. 

2. Gera T, Shah D, Sachdev HS. Zinc Supplementation for Promoting Growth in Children under 5 years of 
age in Low- and Middle-income Countries: A Systematic Review. Indian pediatrics 2019; 56(5): 391-
406. 

3. Radhakrishna KV, Hemalatha R, Geddam JJ, Kumar PA, Balakrishna N, Shatrugna V. Effectiveness of 
zinc supplementation to full term normal infants: a community based double blind, randomized, 
controlled, clinical trial. PLoS One 2013; 8(5): e61486. 

4. WHO/UNICEF. World Health Organization/UNICEF, Clinical Management of Acute Diarrhoea. , 2004. 

5. King JC. Zinc: an essential but elusive nutrient. The American journal of clinical nutrition 2011; 94(2): 
679S-84S. 

6. King JC, Shames DM, Woodhouse LR. Zinc homeostasis in humans. The Journal of nutrition 2000; 
130(5S Suppl): 1360S-6S. 

7. Kondaiah P, Yaduvanshi PS, Sharp PA, Pullakhandam R. Iron and Zinc Homeostasis and Interactions: 
Does Enteric Zinc Excretion Cross-Talk with Intestinal Iron Absorption? Nutrients 2019; 11(8). 

8. Vallee BL, Falchuk KH. The biochemical basis of zinc physiology. Physiological reviews 1993; 73(1): 
79-118. 

9. IOM. Institute of Medicine (US) Panel on Micronutrients. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, 
Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, 
Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US): National Academies Press 
(US); 2001; 2001. 

10. Hess FM, King JC, Margen S. Zinc excretion in young women on low zinc intakes and oral 
contraceptive agents. The Journal of nutrition 1977; 107(9): 1610-20. 

11. Hunt CD, Johnson PE, Herbel J, Mullen LK. Effects of dietary zinc depletion on seminal volume and 
zinc loss, serum testosterone concentrations, and sperm morphology in young men. The American 
journal of clinical nutrition 1992; 56(1): 148-57. 

12. Jackson MJ, Jones DA, Edwards RH, Swainbank IG, Coleman ML. Zinc homeostasis in man: studies 
using a new stable isotope-dilution technique. British Journal of Nutrition. 1984; 51(2): 199-208. 

13. Kapil U, Bhadoria AS, Sareen N. Correlates of zinc deficiency among children in age group of six to 
sixty months belonging to the low-income group. Journal of family & community medicine 2013; 20(2): 
139-40. 

14. Pathak P, Kapil U, Kapoor SK, Dwivedi SN, Singh R. Magnitude of zinc deficiency among nulliparous 
non-pregnant women in a rural community of Haryana State, India. Food and nutrition bulletin 2003; 
24(4): 368-71. 

15. Kapil U, Jain K. Magnitude of zinc deficiency amongst under five children in India. Indian journal of 
paediatrics 2011; 78(9): 1069-72. 

16. Pathak P, Kapil U, Kapoor SK, et al. Prevalence of multiple micronutrient deficiencies amongst pregnant 
women in a rural area of Haryana. Indian journal of paediatrics 2004; 71(11): 1007-14. 

17. Pathak P, Kapil U. Role of trace elements zinc, copper and magnesium during pregnancy and its 
outcome. Indian journal of paediatrics 2004; 71(11): 1003-5. 

18. Pathak P, Kapil U, Dwivedi SN, Singh R. Serum zinc levels amongst pregnant women in a rural block of 
Haryana state, India. Asia Pacific journal of clinical nutrition 2008; 17(2): 276-9. 

19. Kapil U, Pathak P, Singh P, Singh C. Zinc and magnesium nutriture amongst pregnant mothers of urban 
slum communities in Delhi: a pilot study. Indian pediatrics 2002; 39(4): 365-8. 

186 
 



20. Kapil U, Toteja GS, Rao S, Pandey RM. Zinc deficiency amongst adolescents in Delhi. Indian pediatrics 
2011; 48(12): 981-2. 

21. CNNS. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Government of India, Comprehensive 
National Nutrition Survey (CNNS) National Report. New Delhi; 2019. 

22. Wada L, Turnlund JR, King JC. Zinc utilization in young men fed adequate and low zinc intakes. The 
Journal of nutrition 1985; 115(10): 1345-54. 

23. Milne DB, Canfield WK, Mahalko JR, Sandstead HH. Effect of dietary zinc on whole body surface loss 
of zinc: impact on estimation of zinc retention by balance method. The American journal of clinical 
nutrition 1983; 38(2): 181-6. 

24. Johnson PE, Hunt CD, Milne DB, Mullen LK. Homeostatic control of zinc metabolism in men: zinc 
excretion and balance in men fed diets low in zinc. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1993; 
57(4): 557-65. 

25. Lee DY, Prasad AS, Hydrick-Adair C, Brewer G, Johnson PE. Homeostasis of zinc in marginal human 
zinc deficiency: role of absorption and endogenous excretion of zinc. The Journal of laboratory and 
clinical medicine 1993; 122(5): 549-56. 

26. Baer MT, King JC. Tissue zinc levels and zinc excretion during experimental zinc depletion in young 
men. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1984; 39(4): 556-70. 

27. Hallfrisch J, Powell A, Carafelli C, Reiser S, Prather ES. Mineral balances of men and women 
consuming high fiber diets with complex or simple carbohydrate. The Journal of nutrition 1987; 117(1): 
48-55. 

28. Turnlund JR, King JC, Keyes WR, Gong B, Michel MC. A stable isotope study of zinc absorption in 
young men: effects of phytate and alpha-cellulose. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1984; 
40(5): 1071-7. 

29. Spencer H, Asmussen CR, Holtzman RB, Kramer L. Metabolic balances of cadmium, copper, 
manganese, and zinc in man. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1979; 32(9): 1867-75. 

30. Snedeker SM, Smith SA, Greger JL. Effect of dietary calcium and phosphorus levels on the utilization of 
iron, copper, and zinc by adult males. The Journal of nutrition 1982; 112(1): 136-43. 

31. Mahalko JR, Sandstead HH, Johnson LK, Milne DB. Effect of a moderate increase in dietary protein on 
the retention and excretion of Ca, Cu, Fe, Mg, P, and Zn by adult males. The American journal of 
clinical nutrition 1983; 37(1): 8-14. 

32. Johnson MA, Baier MJ, Greger JL. Effects of dietary tin on zinc, copper, iron, manganese, and 
magnesium metabolism of adult males. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1982; 35(6): 1332-8. 

33. Behall KM, Scholfield DJ, Lee K, Powell AS, Moser PB. Mineral balance in adult men: effect of four 
refined fibers. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1987; 46(2): 307-14. 

34. Coudray C, Bellanger J, Castiglia-Delavaud C, Remesy C, Vermorel M, Rayssignuier Y. Effect of 
soluble or partly soluble dietary fibres supplementation on absorption and balance of calcium, 
magnesium, iron and zinc in healthy young men. European journal of clinical nutrition 1997; 51(6): 375-
80. 

35. Holbrook JT, Smith JC, Jr., Reiser S. Dietary fructose or starch: effects on copper, zinc, iron, 
manganese, calcium, and magnesium balances in humans. The American journal of clinical nutrition 
1989; 49(6): 1290-4. 

36. Turnlund JR, Durkin N, Costa F, Margen S. Stable isotope studies of zinc absorption and retention in 
young and elderly men. The Journal of nutrition 1986; 116(7): 1239-47. 

37. Hunt JR, Matthys LA, Johnson LK. Zinc absorption, mineral balance, and blood lipids in women 
consuming controlled lactoovo vegetarian and omnivorous diets for 8 wk. The American journal of 
clinical nutrition 1998; 67(3): 421-30. 

187 
 



38. Colin MA, Taper LJ, Ritchey SJ. Effect of dietary zinc and protein levels on the utilization of zinc and 
copper by adult females. The Journal of nutrition 1983; 113(8): 1480-8. 

39. Taper LJ, Hinners ML, Ritchey SJ. Effects of zinc intake on copper balance in adult females. The 
American journal of clinical nutrition 1980; 33(5): 1077-82. 

40. Swanson CA, King JC. Zinc utilization in pregnant and non-pregnant women fed controlled diets 
providing the zinc RDA. The Journal of nutrition 1982; 112(4): 697-707. 

41. Wisker E, Nagel R, Tanudjaja TK, Feldheim W. Calcium, magnesium, zinc, and iron balances in young 
women: effects of a low-phytate barley-fiber concentrate. The American journal of clinical nutrition 
1991; 54(3): 553-9. 

42. Kodkany BS, Bellad RM, Mahantshetti NS, et al. Biofortification of pearl millet with iron and zinc in a 
randomized controlled trial increases absorption of these minerals above physiologic requirements in 
young children. The Journal of nutrition 2013; 143(9): 1489-93. 

43. Nair KM, Brahmam GN, Radhika MS, et al. Inclusion of guava enhances non-heme iron bioavailability 
but not fractional zinc absorption from a rice-based meal in adolescents. The Journal of nutrition 2013; 
143(6): 852-8. 

44. Rosado JL, Hambidge KM, Miller LV, et al. The quantity of zinc absorbed from wheat in adult women 
is enhanced by biofortification. The Journal of nutrition 2009; 139(10): 1920-5. 

45. Couzy F, Kastenmayer P, Mansourian R, Guinchard S, Munoz-Box R, Dirren H. Zinc absorption in 
healthy elderly humans and the effect of diet. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1993; 58(5): 
690-4. 

46. Kim J, Paik HY, Joung H, Woodhouse LR, Li S, King JC. Effect of dietary phytate on zinc homeostasis 
in young and elderly Korean women. Journal of the American College of Nutrition 2007; 26(1): 1-9. 

47. Armah SM. Fractional Zinc Absorption for Men, Women, and Adolescents Is Overestimated in the 
Current Dietary Reference Intakes. The Journal of nutrition 2016; 146(6): 1276-80. 

48. King JC. Effect of reproduction on the bioavailability of calcium, zinc and selenium. The Journal of 
nutrition 2001; 131(4): 1355S-8S. 

49. Fung EB, Ritchie LD, Woodhouse LR, Roehl R, King JC. Zinc absorption in women during pregnancy 
and lactation: a longitudinal study. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1997; 66(1): 80-8. 

50. Donangelo CM, Zapata CL, Woodhouse LR, Shames DM, Mukherjea R, King JC. Zinc absorption and 
kinetics during pregnancy and lactation in Brazilian women. The American journal of clinical nutrition 
2005; 82(1): 118-24. 

51. Hambidge KM, Miller LV, Mazariegos M, et al. Upregulation of Zinc Absorption Matches Increases in 
Physiologic Requirements for Zinc in Women Consuming High- or Moderate-Phytate Diets during Late 
Pregnancy and Early Lactation. The Journal of nutrition 2017; 147(6): 1079-85. 

52. Taylor CM, Bacon JR, Aggett PJ, Bremner I. Homeostatic regulation of zinc absorption and endogenous 
losses in zinc-deprived men. The American journal of clinical nutrition 1991; 53(3): 755-63. 

53. Hunt JR, Mullen LK, Lykken GI. Zinc retention from an experimental diet based on the U.S.F.D.A. total 
diet study. Nutrition Research 1992; 12(11): 1335-44. 

54. Sian L, Krebs NF, Westcott JE, et al. Zinc homeostasis188 during lactation in a population with a low 
zinc intake. The American journal of clinical nutrition 2002; 75(1): 99-103. 

55. Brown KH, Rivera JA, Bhutta Z, Gibson RS, King JC, Lönnerdal B, Ruel MT, Sandtröm B, 
Wasantwisut E, Hotz C, International Zinc Nutrition Consultative Group (IZiNCG. International Zinc 
Nutrition Consultative Group (IZiNCG) technical document# 1. Assessment of the risk of zinc 
deficiency in populations and options for its control. Food and nutrition bulletin. 2004 Mar; 25(1 Suppl 
2):S99-203.. 

188 
 



56. Ghosh S, Sinha S, Shivakumar N, Thomas T, Sachdev HS, Kurpad AV. Daily Iron Requirements in 
Healthy Indian Children and Adolescents. Indian paediatrics. 2019; 56(7): 551-5. 

57. Dawson JB, Walker BE. Direct determination of zinc in whole blood, plasma and urine by atomic 
absorption spectroscopy. Clinica chimica acta; international journal of clinical chemistry 1969; 26(3): 
465-75. 

58. Widdowson EM, and J. W. T. Dickerson. Chemical composition of the body. Mineral Metabolism. 
Edited by Comar CL, Bronner F; 1964. 

59. Hemalatha P, Bhaskaram P, Kumar PA, Khan MM, Islam MA. Zinc status of breastfed and formula-fed 
infants of different gestational ages. Journal of tropical paediatrics. 1997; 43(1): 52-4. 

60. Rajalakshmi K, Srikantia SG. Copper, zinc, and magnesium content of breast milk of Indian women. 
The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1980; 33(3): 664-9. 

61. Sharda B, Bhandari B, Bhandari LM. Copper, zinc, magnesium and cadmium levels of breast milk of 
Indian women. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 1983; 77(2):201-3. 

62. Sazawal S, Jalla S, Dhingra P, Krebs N, Black RE, Bhan MJFJ. Impact of zinc supplementation on 
breast milk zinc levels among low socioeconomic Indian women. FASEB Journal. 1996; 10(3). 

 

189 
 



11. TRACE ELEMENTS 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Among the trace elements other than Fe, Zn and I, the requirements of chromium (Cr), copper 
(Cu), manganese (Mn), selenium (Se) have been studied in more detail and their recommended 
dietary intakes were suggested by different agencies. However, these recommendations are based 
on data available from clinical experimental studies with small sample size or based on dietary 
intake data from the population surveys. Data needed for direct assessment of the requirement of 
these trace elements are unavailable and thus the recommendations have been only provisional.  

 

Some information on the intakes of copper, manganese and chromium in adults has been 
reported in a few community-based studies in India. However, data on absorption and excretion of 
these nutrients needed for estimating their EARs and RDAs are not yet available in the Indian 
population. International Agencies including Institute of Medicine in the USA and European Food 
Safety Authority have provided recommendations on adequate intake of these trace elements. RDA 
for Zn and I have been considered separately in view of their importance and a brief account of 
relevant information on the nutritional significance and suggested safe dietary intakes for Cu, Cr, 
Mn and Se for adults are provided in this chapter. 
 
11.1. COPPER, MANGANESE AND CHROMIUM 

11.1.1. Copper (Cu) 
 

The adult body contains approximately about 80 mg Cu mainly stored in liver, followed by 
brain and muscle. Sea foods, legume seeds and oilseeds like sesame, sunflower and nuts are rich 
sources of Cu. Fruits and vegetables are moderate sources. Cu is transported in the form of 
ceruloplasmin in blood/plasma. Zn is well known to be antagonistic to Cu bioavailability in terms 
of its competition with metallothionein binding and thus enhancing the requirement of Cu. 
Cytochrome C oxidase, superoxide dismutase (SOD), lysyl oxidase and tyrosine oxidase are the 
major Cu containing metalloenzymes of which the SOD is also dependent on Zn. Deficiency signs 
of copper include anemia, vascular complications, osteoporosis and neurological manifestations. 
Lysyl oxidase is decreased in Cu deficiency leading to diminished collagen and elastin cross-
linking. Anemia may result from deranged iron metabolism.  

 

In fact, blood levels of hemoglobin were found to correlate significantly with the status of 
copper apart from other nutrients and relative significance of copper was more than that of ascorbic 
acid in iron-deficiency anemia1. Copper deficiency has also been found in special conditions such 
as premature infants fed milk formulas, in infants recovering from malnutrition associated with 
chronic diarrhea and fed cow’s milk2, and in patients with prolonged total parenteral nutrition. On 
the other hand, excessive copper accumulation or copper overload has been recorded in Indian 
childhood cirrhosis (ICC). However, it has been concluded that though copper has a role to play in 
ICC, it may also be attributed to the genetic predisposition3. 

 

A number of indicators for Cu status in humans have been considered by previous studies. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) has used a combination of indicators, including plasma copper and 
ceruloplasmin concentrations, erythrocyte superoxide dismutase activity, and platelet copper 
concentration in controlled human depletion/repletion studies suggested Estimated Average 
Requirement (EAR) for copper for the US population4. However, all of these indicators have some 
limitations. Serum copper concentration falls in copper deficient individuals and returns to normal 

190 
 



within a few days of copper supplementation. But it does not reflect dietary intake except when 
intake is below a certain level. Similarly, Ceruloplasmin does not respond to dietary intake, unless 
intake is very low5. Moreover, ceruloplasmin is an acute phase protein and its levels may elevate 
with use of contraceptives and steroids. Therefore, although low ceruloplasmin concentration 
denotes copper depletion or deficiency, its use as a bio-marker of copper is limited in determining 
the copper overload.The dietary copper intake at which ceruloplasmin concentration ceases to 
increase in response to increased dietary copper may be considered the copper requirement for 
ceruloplasmin synthesis. Erythrocyte superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity is suggested to be a 
more specific indicator of copper status. However, it can increase in situations that produce 
oxidative stress and also in alcoholism. Two additional indicators - platelet copper concentration 
and platelet cytochrome c oxidase activity - have been demonstrated to respond more rapidly to low 
dietary copper in a few studies4. 

 

Copper balance studies in humans are problematic because copper balance can be achieved 
over a broad range of dietary copper intakes and reflects prior dietary intake4. Studies with long 
duration are thus needed due to long adaptation period but such studies are not available. Moreover, 
the copper losses, although small, are very difficult to quantify. Therefore, balance studies have not 
been used by the IOM for estimating copper requirements. 

 

Another important consideration is that the bioavailability of copper is influenced markedly 
by the amount of copper in the diet. Bioavailability was found to range from 75% of dietary copper 
absorbed when the diet contains only 400 μg/day to 12% absorbed when the diet contained 7.5 
mg/day6, 7. In addition, copper homeostasis is very efficient. As more copper is absorbed, turnover 
is faster and more copper is excreted into the gastrointestinal tract7. This excretion is probably the 
primary point of regulation of total body copper and helps to protect against copper deficiency and 
toxicity. 
 

Copper status in Indians: A few studies from India have assessed serum copper concentrations 
and majority of these were conducted in disease conditions like liver cirrhosis, cystic fibrosis, 
visceral leishmaniasis etc. Additionally, studies have estimated serum copper when the intervention 
included zinc supplementation. One study has reported low serum copper levels (<80 µg/dL) among 
a tribal population in Jharkhand State with prevalence about 35%8. 
 
Dietary copper intake: Indian diets showed high variation in copper intakes (1.6-5.2 mg/day). 
Data from NNMB rural and urban surveys shows dietary intakes of copper within the above range 
(Table 1). High variation was also observed in absorption (7-37%) and these values were lower in 
case of vegetarian diet compared to 40-50% absorption reported from meat based diets in the 
western countries4. 
 

Deriving Dietary requirements EAR and RDA for Cu: The factorial computation of Cu 
requirements is not possible due to lack of data on the obligatory copper losses in healthy people 
and estimates of additional requirements due to growth (tissue and blood volume expansion), 
lactation and pregnancy needs.  
 

Pregnancy: IOM has estimated EAR for pregnant women based on estimates of the amount of 
copper that must be accumulated during pregnancy (18 mg) to account for the fetus and products of 
pregnancy. Over the course of pregnancy, this additional requirement is approximately 67 μg/day of 
absorbed copper or 135 μg/day of dietary copper, a value based on 50 % bioavailability and 
rounding. Copper absorption is likely to be more efficient during pregnancy9. 
 

191 
 



Lactation: The EAR for lactation is determined on the basis of the amount of copper secreted in 
breast milk (approximately 200 μg/day) plus the EAR for NPNL women. Considering copper 
bioavailability to be 50%, an additional 400 μg/day of copper is recommended for lactating women. 
 
Infants, children and adolescents: Data for computation of EARs / RDAs for copper for infants, 
children or adolescents are not available. Therefore, these have been estimated by extrapolation 
from the adult recommendations in the IOM guidelines (Table 3). 
 

As there is no evidence to revise the acceptable intake (2 mg/d) suggested by the previous 
committee, the same value has been retained (Table 2). 
 

Table 1: Dietary intakes (Median) of trace elements 
 

NNMB Urban data 2016 

Chromium Manganese Selenium 
Copper (mg/day) 

(μg/day) (mg/day) (μg/day) 
Age 

(years) Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female 

Median 

1-3 0.59 0.58 21.61 22.03 1.89 1.74 17.91 15.68 

4-6 0.89 0.87 28.16 27.90 3.01 2.85 32.23 29.05 

7-9 1.07 1.00 32.64 30.47 3.73 3.45 42.40 36.07 

10-12 1.28 1.15 36.23 33.99 4.66 4.10 51.36 45.49 

13-15 1.43 1.30 41.32 36.81 5.12 4.63 58.23 52.43 

16-17 1.57 1.30 43.71 38.12 6.06 4.74 71.10 54.88 

18-60 1.80 1.54 50.68 46.27 6.63 5.41 76.30 59.28 

60 & Above 1.73 1.37 51.32 43.34 6.32 4.78 70.39 52.59 

NNMB Rural data 2011-12 

1-3 0.62 0.52 12.45 12.61 1.35 1.34 

4-6 0.97 0.81 19.95 20.27 2.08 2.16 

7-9 1.23 0.97 25.13 23.22 2.65 2.49 

10-12 1.35 1.07 28.54 27.15 3.01 2.83 
 

13-15 1.54 1.19 32.55 31.08 3.46 3.16 

16-17 1.67 1.28 36.49 33.34 3.80 3.33 

18-60 1.87 1.38 41.43 36.83 4.41 3.70 

60 & Above 1.65 1.16 37.98 30.64 3.85 3.12 

 
 
 

192 
 



11.1.2. Manganese (Mn) 
 

Plant foods like wheat, barley, rice bran are rich in Mn. Fruits and vegetables are moderate 
sources and animal foods like eggs, beef and chicken contain low levels. About 10-20 mg of Mn is 
present in the body. Bone, liver, pancreas and kidney are important tissues containing Mn. Mn are 
the cofactor for the enzymes SOD, arginase, and glycosyl transferase which are involved in 
carbohydrate, lipid and amino acid metabolism10. There are other enzymes like phosphoenol 
pyruvate carboxy kinase and glutamine synthetase, which are activated by Mn ions. Growth failure, 
skeletal abnormalities and impaired reproductive function have been reported to be caused by Mn 
deficiency. Abnormal insulin metabolism and glucose tolerance are the important effects attributed 
to Mn deficiency. Though, there are reports on adverse effects from exposure to manganese 
(occupational hazard), most of them are 
inhalational. ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Table 2. Absorption and acceptable intakes 

substances and Disease Registry) report says of Cu, Mn, Cr and Se for Indian adults 

that oral exposure to contaminated water sources 
 Indian adults 

can equally be hazardous as inhalational 
Trace Mean and Acceptable 

exposure leading to neurological disorder known 
element range intake* 

as manganism11. However, threshold levels to 
Absorption % 

cause these effects have not been established 
Cu (mg/d) 18 (7-37) 1.7 

yet. Hence, Mn is established as no observed 
adverse effect level and an adequate intake has Mn (mg/d) 14 (2-24) 4.0 

been suggested. Isotopic turnover and chemical Cr (µg/d) 79 (63-94) 50 

balance studies have revealed Mn requirement Selenium ≈ 90 40 

of an adult to be between 2-5 mg/d (Table 2). (µg/d) 
 

 *Reference 18 
 

Table 3  
 

Trace 
IOM Dietary reference intakes# 

elements 
Preg Lacta 

Infants Children Adolescent Adult 
nancy tion 

Age Above 18 
9-13 years 14-18 years Above Above 

group 0-6 7-12 1-3 4-8 years 
14 14 

months months years years 
Boys Girls Boys Girls Men Women years years 

Cu 
200 220 340 440 700 700 - - 900 900 1000 890 

(µg/d) 

Mn 2200 
3 600 1200 1500 1900 1600 1600 2300 1800 2000 2600 

(µg/d)  

Cr 
0.2 5.5 11 15 25 21 35 24 35 25 30* 45* 

(µg/d) 

Se 
15** 20** 20 30 40 40 55 55 55 55 60 70 

(µg/d) 

*1 unit less in case if less than 18 years 
** Adequate Intake (AI) 
# Reference 4 
 

Men have been found to have significantly less manganese absorption than women and that 
this difference may be related to iron status12. It has also been demonstrated that high ferritin 
concentrations were associated with reduced Mn absorption13.  

 

193 
 



Wide range of manganese intakes can result in manganese balance and therefore, balance data 
are not useful to set an EAR. IOM has used dietary intake data from the population surveys to set an 
AI for manganese4. 

 
In the Indian context, there is no evidence to revise the acceptable intake (4 mg/d) of Mn 

suggested by the previous committee. Therefore, the same value has been retained (Table 2). 
 
11.1.3. Chromium (Cr) 
 

Chromium is found to be distributed in nature in a way similar to that of Cu. Trivalent 
chromium has been postulated to be necessary for the efficacy of insulin in regulating metabolism 
of carbohydrates, lipids and protein. Sea foods (oysters), meat and whole grain products are good 
sources, followed by egg, butter and tubers like potato. Cheese is a concentrated source of Cr. Fruits 
and vegetables, in general, are not good sources of Cr. In chromium deficiency too, impaired 
glucose tolerance and weight loss along with peripheral neuropathy were observed. Cr deficiency 
attributable to its lack in the body was reported in total parenteral nutrition. In such cases Cr 
supplementation reversed symptoms of glucose intolerance and insulin requirement. There has been 
preponderance of evidence for Cr-potentiating insulin action both in vitro and in vivo. Cr was 
shown to be part of the ‘Glucose tolerance factor’ and thus has an impact on glucose tolerance. 

 
Chromium deficiency has been reported in three patients who did not receive supplemental 

chromium in their total parenteral nutrition (TPN) solutions14,15,16. There has not been any evidence 
or adverse effects reported on chromium overload17. 

 
Published data to set an EAR for chromium is not available. IOM has therefore, set an 

Adequate Intake (AI) based on the estimated mean intakes from dietary surveys. The AI is 35 
μg/day and 25 μg/day for young men and women, respectively. 

 
In view of these limitations, the recommendation by the previous committee on ‘acceptable 

intake’ of chromium (50 µg/d) for adults has been retained (Table 2). 
 
Further research is needed to determine absorption and metabolism of chromium to derive 

EAR for adults and requirements during pregnancy and lactation. 
 
11.1.4. Requirements of Cu, Mn and Cr for Indian adults 
 

Most of the data on nutrient requirements and dietary intake level of these three trace elements 
was generated during the years 1980-81 by Rao and Rao et al18,19. Subsequently, Singh et al20 
reported the mean daily intake by rural and urban population, respectively, for Cu (mg): 2.01, 1.85; 
Mn (mg): 6.5, 8.7; Cr (µg): 60.5, 75.5, from North India. Other studies of Pathak et al21 and Kapil 
et al22 showed that the daily intakes of rural underprivileged communities for Cu 2.7 mg, Mn 9.6 
mg /d, are far more than the average requirement reported here. Another study by Agte et al23 from 
Western part of India reported that the absorption of Cu ranged from 10.2-21.7% at intakes of 2.7-
5.2 mg/d; (the mean absorption was 17.8%) confirming the data of Rao and Rao 18. Also, the 
apparent absorption of Cu (16.4%) and Mn (12.2%) were reported by them in ileostomized human 
volunteers24. Most data on dietary content of these trace elements generated in recent times 20,21,22, 
though sparse, agree with the content first described for typical diets representing different regions 
of the country by Rao and Rao19. 
 

R. Raghunath et al. (2006) observed the mean (SD) intake of Cu and Mn among adult 
population of Mumbai as 1.0 (1.6) and 2 (1.63), respectively. Vegetarian and non-vegetarian diet 

194 
 



were compared and a significant difference was established between these groups in case of 
Manganese25. Patra et al. (2009) reported a mean intake of Cu to be 3.3 (1.2)26. Gupta et al. (2017) 
reported copper and chromium was not included in diet adequately by 81% and 89%, respectively 
of the Geriatric population27. 

 
The earlier data pertain to the chemical balances conducted on adult male volunteers for Cu, 

Mn and Cr. The Indian Food Composition Tables published in 2017 provide information on these 
trace elements in more than 400 foods. Based on the NNMB data on the dietary intakes of the above 
trace elements in Indians and their homeostatic regulation, nutritional deficiency of these elements 
appears to be unlikely.  
 
11.2.  SELENIUM 
 

11.2.1. Background and dietary sources 
 

Importance of Selenium (Se) in biology has been intimately connected with that of the 
“trinity” of antioxidants, the remaining two being cysteine and vitamin E. The discovery of 
selenium as an important nutrient by Schwarz and Foltz28 can be traced to the prevention of 
nutritional liver necrosis in vitamin E deficient rats when Se in trace amounts were supplemented to 
them. Selenium in food is present in at least two forms - as Selenomethionine in plant foods and 
selenocysteine in animal foods29.  

 

The selenium content of food varies depending on the selenium content of the soil where the 
animal was raised or the plant was grown. Organ meat and sea foods are rich sources of selenium, 
their content in the diet being 0.10-1.3 μg/g. Bioavailability of Se from sea foods may be low 
because of high concentration of heavy metals like Cd, Hg etc30. There are certain plant foods like 
mustard, and to a lesser extent garlic and broccoli, which accumulate Se from soil. Cereals and 
grains are major dietary sources of Se (<0.1 μg/g to 0.8 μg/g). Bioavailability from common foods 
is reported to be in the range of 70-90%30. 

 
11.2.2. Functions 
 

Glutathione peroxidase is the only selenoprotein enzyme well studied for the biological role of 
Se. Deiodinase isoenzymes that are involved in thyroid hormone metabolism are also selenium-
containing proteins. Enzymes like thiolase and glycine reductase are the other less known sources 
of selenoproteins. Selenomethionine cannot be synthesized in the body. It can substitute for 
methionine in proteins or it can be converted to selenocysteine (SeCys). Inorganic selenium is 
incorporated into selenoproteins by condensation with serine-bound to tRNA, forming a tRNA- Se-
Cys complex that is inserted into selenoproteins by the unique UGA codon sequence. Apart from its 
antioxidant protection against free radicals, Se was found to be functional in detoxification and 
immune potentiation30,31. Inorganic selenium enters a reductive pathway to form reduced selinide 
through a complex formation with glutathione-selenodiglutathione (GSSeSG) and glutathione 
selenopersulfide (GSSeH). Selenium disulfide may undergo methylation in the presence of S-
adenosylmethionine and get excreted in breath or in urine.  

 
Plasma Se and glutathione peroxidise (GSHPx) activity indicate the short-term status, 

whereas, red blood cell Se and GSHPX activity reflect long-term Se status. Platelet GSHPx activity 
is considered as a good indicator for assessing changes in selenium status. Urinary excretion is 
approximately twice the dietary intake and is highly variable with intakes of Se31,32. Vitamin E and 
Se along with reduced glutathione (GSH) act in a complementary manner in oxygen radical 
scavenging activity and therefore spare the requirements of each other. 

195 
 



Selenium intake in adequate quantities might prevent from certain diseases like cancer, 
cardio-vascular diseases, cognitive decline and thyroid diseases as it plays a mighty role in 
development or the progression of the disease33. 
 

11.2.3. Deficiency and excess  
 

Selenium deficiency has been associated with two childhood/adolescent endemic diseases, 
‘Keshan’ (cardiomyopathy) and ‘KashinBeck’ (osteoarthritis) in China. These diseases are found to 
be prevalent in certain areas in China where the intake of Se is very low, 7-11 µg/d 29. A number of 
epidemiological studies suggest that poor intake of Se is associated with increased risk of cancer or 
heart disease, both related to its antioxidant function31. People undergoing long term hemodialysis 
and people living with HIV are at risk groups of selenium inadequacy34.   

 

Selenium toxicity (selenosis) is well known in livestock in seleniferous areas leading to blind 
staggers. Selenium poisoning has been observed in humans under occupational exposures or in 
seleniferous areas. Daily intakes above 700 μg/d or acute consumption of 1-7 mg Se/kg/d result in 
toxicity in humans. Dermatitis, depression and brittle finger nails, excessive tooth decay, numbness 
and hemiplegia are some of the non-specific symptoms of poisoning31. 

 

11.2.4. Requirements    
 

A broad range of Se requirements (9-80 μg) has been suggested based on the balance 
studies32. The requirements are also derived using saturation of blood or plasma glutathione 
peroxidase activity in people from endemic areas in China. After supplementing subjects suffering 
from keshan disease with different levels of selenium, dietary intakes beyond 40 μg/d did not 
produce any further increase in GPX activity29,30. After adjustment for body weight and variations 
in bio-availability and dietary pattern, Se requirement was worked out to be 60-70 μg/d. Recent 
FAO/WHO Committee recommended a Se intake of 26 μg/d for adult women and 36 μg/d for adult 
men as normal requirement35. These values are lower than the corresponding figures of 55 and 70 
μg/d suggested by US Agency36. 

 

Based on the estimated accumulation of selenium by the fetus to saturate its seleno proteins of 
selenium [1,000 μg (12.6 μmol)], IOM has recommended an additional 4 μg (0.05 μmol)/day of 
selenium in pregnancy36. As most selenium is highly bioavailable, no adjustment is made for 
absorption. Based on the amount of selenium in breast milk, requirement during lactation has been 
estimated by adding 14 μg (0.18 μmol)/day of selenium to the requirement for the non-pregnant and 
non-lactating (NPNL) women. Requirement for children and adolescents in the age group 1-18 
years are estimated by extrapolation from the adult RDAs. 
 

11.2.5.  Situation in India 
 

There have been very few studies on Se nutrition in the Indian population. Studies from NIN 
on staple foods from local markets near Hyderabad showed that the Se content ranged between 30-
400 μg/100g for most cereals and pulses. Average estimated dietary intake was 41-51 μg/d in 
different income groups37. NNMB data from the urban survey in 2016 show higher median intakes 
76.3 μg/d in men and 59.2 μg/d women (Table 1). Extrapolating the analyzed data to the dietary 
pattern reported in 7 states, the mean Se intakes were found to vary from 71 to 163 μg/d38. 
According to WHO RDA values, no state has lower than recommended intakes. Another estimate 
of intake of Se was 61 μg/day in rice-pulse based South Indian diets39. 

 
Based on the limited data available on blood values of Se or GSHPx activity in plasma, red 

cell or platelets, there was no evidence of inadequate Se status in Indian population. This was true 
both in children and adults 38,40. A recent report from Punjab describes the dietary Se intake and Se 

196 
 



content of hair, nails and urine in subjects investigated from two sets of villages- one with endemic 
selenosis and another control area. Based on the clinical symptoms and biochemical profile, an 
intake above 600 μg/d was associated with selenosis symptoms. The differences in mean values 
were 10-fold in Se intake, at least 20-fold in urinary excretion and more than 40-fold in hair and 
nail Se levels between villages with high and normal Se levels40. The mean urinary Se excretion 
from subjects drawn from non-endemic villages (0.9-1.2 μg/100 ml) are slightly on the lower side 
of normal range reported by Novarro et al41 elsewhere (0.46-5.03 μg Se/100 ml) in persons 
consuming 55 μg dietary Se/d.  Thus, from the available Indian data Se deficiency or depletion does 
not appear to be a problem and the dietary intake (71-163 μg/d) reported38 is consistent with the 
RDA of 36 and 26 μg (for males and females, respectively) as suggested by FAO/WHO.  
 

Due to paucity of new information, a level of 40μg/d recommended as the acceptable intake of 
Se for Indians is retained. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

197 
 



References 

1. Chiplonkar SA, Agte VV, Mengale SS. Relative importance of micronutrient deficiencies in iron 
deficiency anemia. Nutrition research. 2003 Oct 1; 23(10):1355-67. 

2. Shaw JC. Copper deficiency in term and preterm infants. In Nestle nutrition workshop series 1992. 

3. Nayak NC and Chitlae AR. Indian Childhood Cirrhosis (ICC) and ICC like changing scenario of facts 
versus notions. Indian Journal of Medical Research. 2013;137:1029-1042. 

4. Institute of Medicine (IOM): Dietary reference intakes of vitamin A, vitamin K, As, B, Cr, Cu, I, Fe, Zn. 
Food and Nutrition Board., National Acad. Press, Washington DC 2000. 

5. EFSA NDA Panel (EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies), 2015. Scientific Opinion 
on Dietary Reference Values for copper. EFSA Journal 2015;13(10):4253, 51 pp.  

6. Turnlund JR, Keyes WR, Anderson HL, Acord LL. Copper absorption and retention in young men at 
three levels of dietary copper by use of the stable isotope 65Cu. The American journal of clinical 
nutrition. 1989 May 1; 49(5):870-8. 

7. Turnlund JR. Human whole-body copper metabolism. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1998 
May; 67(5):960S-4S. 

8. Kapil U, Singh P. Serum copper levels among a tribal population in Jharkhand State, India: a pilot 
survey. Food and nutrition bulletin. 2005 Sep; 26(3):309-11. 

9. Turnlund JR, Swanson CA, King JC. Copper absorption and retention in pregnant women fed diets 
based on animal and plant proteins. The Journal of nutrition. 1983 Nov 1; 113(11):2346-52. 

10. EFSA NDA Panel (EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies), 2013. Scientific Opinion 
on Dietary Reference Values for manganese. EFSA Journal 2013; 11(11):3419, 44 pp.  

11. ATSDR (Agency for Toxic substances and Disease Registry, US Department of   Health and Human 
Services), 2012. Toxicology profile for manganese.556pp. 

12. Finley JW, Johnson PE, Johnson LK. Sex affects manganese absorption and retention by humans from a 
diet adequate in manganese. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 199460:949–955 

13. Finley JW. Manganese absorption and retention by young women is associated with serum ferritin 
concentration. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1999; 70:37–43. 

14. Brown RO, Forloines-Lynn S, Cross RE, Heizer WD. Chromium deficiency after long-term total 
parenteral nutrition. Digestive diseases and sciences. 1986 Jun 1; 31(6):661-4. 

15. Freund H, Atamian S, Fischer JE. Chromium deficiency during total parenteral nutrition. Jama. 1979 Feb 
2; 241(5):496-8. 

16. Jeejeebhoy KN, Chu RC, Marliss EB, Greenberg GR, Bruce-Robertson A. Chromium deficiency, 
glucose intolerance, and neuropathy reversed by chromium supplementation, in a patient receiving long-
term total parenteral nutrition. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1977; 30:531–538. 

17. EFSA NDA Panel (EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies), 2014. Scientific Opinion 
on Dietary Reference Values for chromium. EFSA Journal 2014; 12(10):3845, 25 pp.  

18. Rao CN and Rao BSN. Absorption and retention of magnesium and some trace elements by man from 
typical Indian diets. Nutrition Metabolism. 1980; 24: 244-254. 

19. Rao BSN and Rao CN. Trace element content of Indian foods and the dietaries.  Indian Journal of 
Medical Research. 1981; 73: 904-909. 

20. Singh RB, Gupta UC, Mittal N, Niaz MA, Ghosh S, Rastogi V. Epidemiologic study of trace elements 
and magnesium on risk of coronary artery disease in rural and urban Indian populations. Journal of the 
American College of Nutrition. 1997 Feb 1; 16(1):62-7. 

198 
 



21. Pathak P, Kapil U, Kapoor SK, Saxena R, Kumar A, Gupta N, Dwivedi SN, Singh R, Singh P. 
Prevalence of multiple micronutrient deficiencies amongst pregnant women in a rural area of Haryana. 
The Indian Journal of Pediatrics. 2004 Nov 1; 71(11):1007-14. 

22. Kapil U, Verma D, Goel M, et al. Dietary intake of trace elements and minerals among adults in 
underprivileged communities of rural Rajasthan, India.  Asian Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
1998; 7:29-32. 

23. Agte V, Chiplonkar S, Joshi N, Paknikar K. Apparent absorption of copper and zinc from composite 
vegetarian diets in young Indian men. Annals of nutrition and metabolism. 1994; 38(1):13-9. 

24. Nayak NC and Chitlae AR, 2013. Indian Childhood Cirrhosis (ICC) and ICC like changing scenario of 
facts versus notions. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 137, 1029-1042 

25. Raghunath R, Tripathi RM, Suseela B, Bhalke S, Shukla VK, PuranikVD. Dietary intake of metals by 
Mumbai adult population. Science of the Total Environment. 2006; 356(1-3):62-68.  

26. Patra AK, Wagh SS, Jain AK, Hegde AG. Assessment of daily intake of trace elements by Kakrapar 
adult population through ingestion pathway. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment. 2010; 169(1-
4):267-272.  

27. Gupta A, Khenduja P, Pandey RM, Sati HC, Sofi NY, Kapil U. Dietary Intake of Minerals, Vitamins, 
and Trace Elements Among Geriatric Population in India. Biological Trace Elements Research. 2017; 
180(1):28-38. doi:10.1007/s12011-017-0972-8 

28. Schwarz K, Foltz CM. Selenium as an integral part of factor 3 against dietary necrotic liver degeneration. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society. 1957 Jun; 79(12):3292-3. 

29. Yang G, Ge K, Chen J, Chen X. Selenium-related endemic diseases and the daily selenium requirement 
of humans. World review of nutrition and dietetics. 1988. 

30. Finley JW. Bioavailability of selenium from foods. Nutrition reviews. 2006 Mar 1; 64(3):146-51. 

31. Levander OA. A global view of human selenium nutrition. Annual review of nutrition. 1987 Jul; 
7(1):227-50. 

32. Levander OA. Selenium. In: Trace elements in human and animal nutrition, 5thEdn. (W Mertz ed.), Acad. 
Press, Orlando, 1986. 

33. National Institutes of Health. Selenium: fact sheet for health professionals. Source Updated March 
2018;2. 

34. EFSA NDA Panel (EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies), 2014. Scientific Opinion 
on Dietary Reference Values for selenium. EFSA Journal 2014; 12(10):3846, 67 pp.  

35. Joint FAO/WHO. Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. A report of the  joint 
FAO/WHO expert consultation, Bangkok, Thailand, 21-30 September 1998, Second Edition, 2004. 

36. Institute of Medicine (IOM): Dietary reference intakes of vitamin C, vitamin E, Selenium and 
carotenoids. Food and Nutrition Board, National Acad. Press, Washington, DC 2000. 

37. Kumar A, Krishnaswamy K. Selenium content of common Indian cereals, pulses, and spices. Journal of 
agricultural and food chemistry. 1997 Jul 16; 45(7):2565-8. 

38. Kumar AD and Krishnaswamy K. Selenium in human nutrition, Nutrition News, 24:1-6, 2003.  

39. Srikumar TS. The mineral and trace element composition of vegetables, pulses and cereals of southern 
India. Food chemistry. 1993 Jan 1; 46(2):163-7. 

40. Hira CK, Partal K, Dhillon KS. Dietary selenium intake by men and women in high and low selenium 
areas of Punjab. Public Health Nutrition. 2004 Feb; 7(1):39-43. 

41. Navarro M, Lopez H, Lopez MC, Perez V. Determination of selenium in urine by hydride generation 
atomic absorption spectrometry. Journal of AOAC International. 1996 May 1; 79(3):773-6. 

 

199 
 



11.3. IODINE  
 
11.3.1. Introduction 
 

Iodine is an essential micronutrient, needed for synthesis of thyroid hormone for optimal 
physical growth and development of humans. The healthy human body contains about 20 mg of 
iodine, 70-80% of which is concentrated in the thyroid gland. Iodine deficiency leads to enlargement 
of thyroid gland, known as endemic goitre, as well as a wide spectrum of disorders, which are termed 
as iodine deficiency disorders (IDD) including abortion, stillbirths, low birth weight, cretinism, 
neonatal chemical hypothyroidism, psycho-motor defects, impaired coordination, mental retardation 
and hypothyroidism. Studies have revealed that in an iodine deficient environment, school children 
have about 13.5 IQ points lower and exhibit poor scholastic performance1. Iodine deficiency is known 
to affect the livestock as well, including cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry in the form of abortions, 
stillbirths, low birth weight, inadequate growth, and functional disabilities2. IDD is one of the most 
important micronutrient deficiency disorders of public health significance in India3,4.  
 

11.3.2. Aetiology  
 

Environmental iodine deficiency is the major etiological factor leading to IDD. Sea water is 
the richest source of iodine on earth. Iodine evaporates due to sunlight into atmosphere along with 
water and then in the form of rain or snow, enriches the top layer of the soil. Plants assimilate the 
iodine from soil and thus form an important source of iodine for humans as well as animals. 
However, soil erosions caused by deforestation and flash floods, continued rain and snow fall, 
changing courses of rivers lead to depletion of iodine rich soil and thus making it iodine deficient. 
Foods that are grown in such soils are deficient in iodine, and communities solely subsisting on 
such foods get exposed to iodine deficiency.   
 

11.3.3. The problem of IDD in India  
 

In India, the classical endemic belt of IDD extends from the State of Jammu and Kashmir in 
the North, through parts of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Northern part of 
Bihar, and West Bengal to North-Eastern states. Encouraged by the results of iodized salt 
supplementation experiment in Kangra valley of Himachal Pradesh, Government of India (GOI), in 
1962, launched the National Goitre Control Programme (NGCP).  

 
Nutrition Foundation of India, in 1981 evaluated National Goitre Control Programme5. In view 

of scientific reports of widespread problem of IDD, GOI in 1984, launched the programme of 
Universal Iodization of salt, with an objective of iodizing entire edible salt in the country in a 
phased manner, from 1986-87. In 1988, PFA Act was amended to specify that iodized salt should 
have iodine in the concentration of at least 30 ppm at production level and at least 15 ppm at the 
consumer level. Subsequently, the Indian Council of Medical Research Task Force study carried out 
during 1989, in 11 districts of nine States revealed goitre prevalence ranging from a low of 6.2% in 
Mirzapur to a high of 65.8% in Dibrugarh. Prevalence of cretinism (a severe form of IDD), ranged 
from 0.1% in Gorakhpur to a high of 6.1% in Central Manipur6.  

 

A country-wide study was carried out by NIN and DGHS in 2003 in 40 districts to assess the 
impact on the prevalence of IDD, particularly in the districts with higher levels of endemicity before 
universal iodization was introduced. This study revealed that the overall prevalence of total goitre 
registered a significant decline from 14-69% during 1984-94 to 2-40% in 2003, especially in the 
north-eastern regions7. The prevalence of total goitre was ≥10% in half of the districts and ≥ 5% in 37 
out of 40 districts surveyed.  The median urinary iodine excretion level among 6-11 year children was 

200 
 



observed to be <100 g/L only in 9 out of 40 districts. State level surveys have also indicated similar 
results suggesting existence of iodine deficiency throughout India8-10. 

 

Recent scientific surveys further identified IDD endemic areas in almost all the States in 
peninsular India, which are termed as Extra-Himalayan foci of IDD. According to Director-General of 
Health Services, it has been observed that 263 out of 324 districts surveyed, and 5 Union Territories 
are endemic for IDD11. Living on the sea coast does not guarantee iodine sufficiency and significant 
pockets of iodine deficiency have been reported from coastal regions in different parts of the 
country. 

 

Unlike nutrients such as iron, calcium or the vitamins, iodine does not occur naturally in 
specific foods; rather, it is present in the soil and is ingested through foods grown on that soil. 
Iodine deficiency results when there is lack of iodine on the earth’s crust. It cannot be eliminated by 
changing dietary habits or by eating specific kinds of foods grown in the same area. 

 

Iodine deficiency remains the single greatest cause of preventable brain damage and mental 
retardation worldwide.  Considering the magnitude of the problem, GOI decided to universalize the 
dietary intake of the specified quantity of iodine12. The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 
Government of India was amended to ban the sale of un-iodized salt for human consumption with 
effect from May 17, 2006. 
 

Sources of Iodine 
 

About 90% of the iodine requirement is met through food, while the rest is obtained through 
drinking water. In India, added iodized salt is the largest contributor of salt intake and thereby 
iodine, in the Indian dietaries13. The NNMB data from rural (2011-12)14 and urban India (2014-
15)15 report a higher average salt intake of 7g/day in adult men and women (18-60y), while it 
ranged from 2-6 g/d in the younger and older age groups. A more recent systematic review 
published in 201716 that reviewed 20 studies conducted in different states in urban and rural areas of 
India from 1986-2014, report a mean weighted population salt intake of 10.98 g/day with no 
evidence of a change over time. Revised standards proposed by FSSAI17 on mandatory fortification 
of all edible salt with iodine at 15-30 ppm (15-30 mg/kg), as part of universal salt iodization 
strategy to prevent iodine deficiency disorders, is in place in India. This amount is close to the 
amount of daily salt intake considered by the previous committee. Therefore, the level of salt intake 
is retained in this report as well. Therefore, daily intake of 10 g of iodized salt should be able to 
provide about 150-300 µg of iodine (if adequately iodized and stored properly), in addition to 
iodine present in foods consumed. The studies carried out by Longvah et al18, on food, water and 
salt samples from 48 districts of 29 Indian states reported a mean iodine content of 32±24.1 
µg/100g in 140 most commonly consumed representative recipes prepared using iodized salt, 
31±16 ppm of iodine in 116 household iodised salt samples and 9±7.8 µg/L in 82 drinking water 
samples.  
 

Stability of Iodine during cooking 
 

It is estimated that iodine in foods is lost in varying amounts during cooking and depends on 
the type of cooking processes employed and the time of addition of salt. The studies carried out by 
Longvah et al18, on 140 most commonly consumed representative recipes prepared using iodized 
salt, from 48 districts of 29 states, reported a mean content of iodine of 32±24.1 µg/100g and an 
average retention of 60±21% though with a wide variation. Similar observations by Rana and 
Raghuvamshi19 from Gujarat and Dodd et al20 from Mumbai revealed about 40 to 70% loss of 
iodine in various types of preparations wherein iodized salt was used. Goindi et al21 found that the 
mean losses of iodine during different cooking procedures were 20-40% depending on the type of 

201 
 



cooking (11.3.13 (20); 11.3.14(21)). Considering these studies a 40% loss of iodine on an average 
maybe more prudent to be considered.  

 
Daily requirement of Iodine 
 

The normal daily dietary intake of iodine by an adult in an iodine sufficient region is about 
100 to 150 g, which is readily absorbed from the gut. Kidneys excrete excess of iodine ingested. 
The levels of urinary excretion of iodine correlate with daily ingestion and hence it is used as an 
index/biomarker of iodine status of the community or the target population groups. 

 

Considering the current salt intake as 10 g, intended to provide about 150-300 µg of iodine, 
cooking losses of about 40% and 70% absorption (as indicated in the previous RDA publication), 
about 63-126 g of iodine will be provided in the usual diets in India. This quantity is broadly 
comparable to the daily physiological needs of the body. 
 

Requirements for Iodine 
 

Due to paucity of data from within the country, the present committee adopted the 
methodologies suggested by IOM22 and FAO/WHO23 to estimate the requirements of iodine for 
Indians and are presented in Table 11.3.1.  
 

Iodine requirements of Infants 

 The IOM recommended an adequate intake (AI) of 110 µg/day for 0-6 month children. This 
was based on an average daily intake of 780 ml human milk, median concentration of 146 µg/L of 
iodine and the average urinary excretion of 12.7 µg/kg/day observed in positive iodine balance 
studies among full term infants during early infancy.  For Indians, considering an average intake of 
700 ml/day of human milk and assuming a similar concentration of iodine in human milk, the 
iodine intake calculated would be 102 µg/day. FAO/WHO recommends an iodine intake of 15 
µg/kg/day for 0-12 month old infants, based on positive iodine balance studies in term infants in 
order to achieve the required iodine stores in the thyroid gland. Considering an average weight of 
5.8 kg in 0-6 months age category in India, the iodine requirement calculated is 87 µg/day. 
Therefore, considering the higher estimate of 102 µg/day, the AI suggested for 0-6 m old infants in 
India is set at 100 µg/day. The AI set for 7-12 month Indian infants is 130 µg/day, which has been 
extrapolated from the AI of the younger infants considering an average human milk intake of 
600ml/day and using the metabolic weight ratio method suggested by IOM, i.e., AI for 7-12m infant 
= AI set for 0-6 m infant x F, where F = (reference weight of 7-12m infant / reference weight of 0-
6m)0.75. 

Iodine requirements of Children and Adolescents 

 EARs for children have been estimated based on the methodology suggested by IOM and 
FAO/WHO, that is, by extrapolating down from the adult EAR using the metabolic weight ratio 
method including growth. EAR for child = EAR set for adult x F, where F = [(reference weight of 
child / reference weight of adult)0.75 x (1+growth factor (GF)]. The GF used were 
 

GF =  0.57 for ages up to 1 years, 
0.25 for ages 1 to 3, 
0.06 for ages 4 to 6, 
0.13 for ages 7 to 9, 
In ages 10 to 15 – 0.11 for boys and 0.08 for girls, 
In ages 16 to 18 – 0.08 for boys and 0.03 for girls. 

 

202 
 



 The EARs calculated for children and adolescents are presented in Table 11.3.1. The RDA 
was computed considering a CV of 20%.  
 

 Positive iodine balance studies in 1.5-2.5y children reported in the IOM document, indicate a 
median iodine intake of 64 µg/day, while the requirement calculated for 1-3y Indian children, using 
the above formula, was 35 µg/day. The RDI for iodine suggested by FAO/WHO is 6 µg/kg/day, 
based on radio iodine uptake and urinary iodine excretion. Considering the average weight of 1-3 y 
Indian child as 11.7 kg, the RDA calculated would be 70 µg/day and EAR back calculated would be 
50 µg/day. Considering the higher estimate, which indicates a positive iodine balance, the EAR set 
for Indian 1-3y children is 65 µg/day after rounding. The RDA set is 91 µg/day, rounded to 90 
µg/day, considering a CV of 20%. 
 
 For the 4-6y and 7-9y children, iodine balance studies in the IOM document report that intake 
of 20-40 µg/day resulted in a negative iodine balance (-23 to -26 µg/day) which suggests that a 
minimum of 66 µg (40+26) rounded to 65 µg of iodine would be required to maintain balance. The 
requirement calculated using the formula referred above, adjusting for Indian weights and growth, 
was 40 and 60 µg/day respectively for 4-6y and 7-9y Indian children. As per recommendations of 
FAO/WHO, the calculated EAR was 78 µg/day for 4-6y child (based on 6 µg/kg/day) and 72 
µg/day for 7-9y child (based on 4 µg/kg/day) considering the reference average weight of 18.3 kg 
and 25.3 kg for 4-6y and 7-9y Indian child respectively. Therefore, considering the higher 
estimates, the EAR for 4-6y Indian children is set at 78 rounded to 80 µg/day and the EAR for 7-9y 
old Indian child is set at 72 rounded to 80 µg/day. The RDA is set at 112 rounded to 120 µg/day for 
the two age groups, considering a CV of 20%. 
 
 For 10-12y adolescents, iodine balance studies indicate an intake of 55 µg/day, while the 
calculated intake based on extrapolation down from adults reported in the IOM document indicates 
73 µg/day. When the Indian values were replaced in the formula, the calculated iodine intake 
requirement was 70 µg/day. As per the FAO/WHO requirement of 4 µg/kg/day and the reference 
Indian body weight, the EAR calculated is 102 rounded to 100 µg/day. Therefore considering the 
higher estimate, the EAR and RDA calculated for Indian 10-12y children is 100 and 140 µg/day 
(rounded to 150 µg/day) respectively.   
 
 With reference to 13-15y and 16-18y adolescents, the EAR recommended by IOM was 95 
µg/day based on extrapolation down from adults, which was higher than that observed in the iodine 
balance studies (58 µg/day). The requirement based on IOM methodology (extrapolation from adult 
values) were calculated using Indian reference body weights of 13-18y age group and the EAR thus 
estimated was 100 µg/day for both the age groups i.e. 13-15y and 16-18y,  independent of gender. 
Using the methods adopted by FAO/WHO (2 µg/kg/day), the EAR calculated was approximately 
72 µg/day and 86 µg/day respectively for the two age groups. However, considering the higher 
estimate observed using IOM methodology, the EAR set for Indian 13-15y and 16-18y children is 
rounded to 100 µg/day and the RDA is set at 140 µg/day, which is rounded to 150 µg/day.  
 

Iodine requirements of Adults 

The EAR of 95 µg/day for adults was set by IOM, based on accumulation of radioiodine in 
the thyroid gland in turnover studies observed in euthyroid individuals and positive iodine balance 
studies in adults with normal thyroid function. Considering a CV of 20% due to variations in 
experimental design, the RDA calculated was 133 µg/day, rounded to 150 µg/day. The FAO/WHO 
recommended an intake of 150 µg/day for adults based on observations such as, the suggested 
intake value corresponded to the normal urinary iodine concentration value of 100 µg/L, the intake 
level was required to maintain iodine stores in the thyroid above the critical threshold of 10mg 

203 
 



required for optimal thyroid hormone synthesis, the intake level was necessary to maintain the 
plasma iodine above the critical limit of 0.1 µg/dL that was likely to be associated with onset of 
goitre. Observations from controlled studies considered in the FAO/WHO document revealed that 
the radioiodine uptake, thyroidal iodine content or the onset of goitre reached a steady state at an 
UIC of ≥100 µg/L that corresponds to an iodine intake of 150 µg/day, which is similar to the RDA 
value suggested by IOM. There is paucity of such data in the Indian population. Hence, based on 
the literature cited above, and assuming similarity even in the Indian context, the EAR for Indian 
Adults ≥19y (Men and Women) is set at 95 µg/day and the RDA at 133 µg/day, rounded to 150 
µg/day, considering the CV of 20%.   

Iodine requirements of Pregnant and Lactating Women 

The iodine EAR of 160 µg/day for pregnant women is suggested by IOM, based on 
information from iodine balance studies, iodine supplementation studies and thyroid iodine content 
of the new-borns and an RDA of 224 µg/day, rounded to 220 µg/day is recommended based on a 
CV of 20%. The technical committee of FAO/WHO recommended and iodine intake of 250 µg/day 
in pregnancy, based on normal median urinary concentration levels of iodine (150 µg/L), in an 
iodine sufficient population. These calculations were based on the average urinary volume of 1.5 
L/day in pregnant women and assuming that 90% iodine ingested is excreted in urine, i.e., for every 
100 µg of iodine ingested, 90 µg is excreted at a concentration of 60 µg/L) and is closer to the RDA 
suggested by IOM. Therefore, for Indian pregnant women, the higher estimate of 250 µg/day for the 
RDA is considered. The EAR is back calculated to 179 µg/day, rounded to 180 µg/day, considering 
a CV of 20%.  

The requirement of iodine for lactating women was fixed by IOM, based on the EAR of adult 
NPNL women (95 µg/day) plus loss of iodine in breast milk (114 µg/day) and the EAR calculated 
was 209 µg/day and considering a CV of 20%, the RDA was 292 µg/day rounded to 290 µg/day. 
The FAO/WHO suggested an iodine intake of 250 µg/day during lactation in order to bring the 
urinary iodine concentration back to normal level (≥100 µg/L) as well as ensure adequate secretion 
of iodine in human milk required by the infants. Therefore, for the Indian lactating women, the 
EAR and RDA is set at 197 µg/day rounded to 200 µg/day and 280 µg/day (considering 20% CV) 
respectively based on the higher estimates suggested by IOM after adjusting for the human milk 
intake by Indian infants (EAR of 95 µg/day of NPNL plus 102 µg/day from 700 ml of human milk).   

The IOM also indicates that there is no data on differences in requirements between genders 
in adults or on any changes with advancing age. 

The RDA suggested by the previous committee that has been adopted from WHO-UNICEF-
ICCIDD23-26 is similar or closer to that suggested by the present committee. 
 

Tolerable Upper Limit (TUL) of iodine intake 
 
Excess of iodine ingestion can be harmful, which may inhibit the synthesis of thyroid 

hormones by the thyroid. This iodine-induced hypothyroidism is known as ‘Wolff-Chaikoff” effect, 
the manifestation of which depends on level of iodine intake before exposure to iodine excess. A 
tolerable upper limit (TUL) of 1100 ug/day has been suggested for adult men and women by IOM 
based on elevated TSH (suggestive of thyroid dysfunction) observed in normal/euthyroidic adult 
men and women with an overall intake of 1700 µg/day (1500 µg from iodine supplements and 
200µg from diet)22. This UTL level is also adopted by the present committee due to lack of 
evidence from India. The TUL of 1100 µg/day is based on a Lowest Observed Adverse Effect 
Level (LOAEL) of 1700 µg daily intake of iodine both from diet and supplements per day and an 
uncertainty factor (UF) of 1.5 (1700/1.5=1133, rounded down to 1100 µg/day). The TUL values for 
children (1-9y) and adolescents (10-18y) are extrapolated from adult values after adjusting for 
reference body weights suggested in Table 3.6 of this document. TUL for child or adolescent = 

204 
 



(TUL for adult x Reference body weight of child or adolescent /reference average body weight of 
adults). The values have been rounded downwards to the nearest 100. Values similar to adult NPNL 
women are considered for pregnant and lactating women, as there is no current evidence on altered 
susceptibility to iodine excess. It was not possible to determine TUL for Infants below 1y, as there 
is no data on adverse effects.     

 

Table 11.3.1 EAR and RDA of iodine for various physiological groups 
 

Reference Category ICMR 2020                 
Age (µg/day) RDA 2010 

Body Weight (ICMR 
Group (µg/day) 

(Kg) 2020) EAR RDA TUL** 

Men 65 >18y 95 150 1100 150 
Women 

55 >18y 95 150 1100 150 
(NPNL) 
Pregnant 

 >18y 180 250 1100 250 
women 

Lactating 
 >18y 200 280 1100 250 

women 
100 100 

Infants 5.8 0-6 m ND Breast milk 
(AI) (AI) 
130 130 

Infants 8.5 6-12 m ND 90 
(AI) (AI) 

Children 11.7 1-3y 65 90 200 90 
Children 18.3 4-6y 80 120 300 90 
Children 25.3 7-9y 80 120 400 120 

Boys 34.9 10-12y 100* 150 600 120 
Girls 36.4 10-12y 100* 150 600 120 
Boys 50.5 13-15y 100* 150 900 150 
Girls 49.6 13-15y 100* 150 900 150 
Boys 64.4 16-18y 100* 150 1100 150 
Girls 55.7 16-18y 100* 150 1100 150 

 

* The values are pooled for gender; ** The TUL recommended by IOM, 2001 for adult men, adult NPNL 
women, pregnant women and lactating women was considered. Average adult reference body weight (men 
and NPNL women) of 60 kg was considered to extrapolate TUL values for children and adults based on 
reference body weights.   
 

Status of iodine content of salt 
 

The level of salt iodisation should provide a physiological intake of 100-150 µg/day, which 
would bring the median urinary iodine excretion (UIE) level within a range of 100-200 µg/L. 
Earlier, the recommended content of iodine in edible salt was ≥15 ppm, while it has been more 
recently revised to 15-30 ppm by the FSSAI17. NFHS 427 reported access to iodized salt (using spot 
test) in 93% of the households. Analysis of a total of 27,123 salt samples by iodometric titration 
method form 29 states and  7 Union territories28 and six different geographical zones29 revealed that 
76% of the samples had >15ppm iodine and 41% had between 15-30ppm, indicating that the 
iodized salt manufacturers in the country were  iodizing the salt with recommended quantity.  
 

Status of Iodine intake of the population 
 

The epidemiological criteria usually employed to assess iodine nutriture in different 
population groups is based on the iodine content of cooking salt/household coverage of adequately 

205 
 



iodized salt and the median urinary iodine concentration (mUIC) in the target groups. As per the 
revised standards recommended by FSSAI17, all forms of edible salt should have 15-30 ppm of 
iodine. According to WHO30, the desired adequate mUIC should be between 100-200 µg/L for 
children, adolescents, adult men, adult women & lactating mothers and between 150-250 µg/L for 
pregnant women.  

 

However, with respect to iodine content in salt, in most of the population based studies, salt 
has been tested using rapid testing kits that do not indicate an absolute value. At best it either 
indicates if the salt is iodized or not or gives a range with in which the iodine value is present. The 
two most recent large population based studies used the iodometric titration method to estimate 
iodine content in cooking salt. These studies conducted pan India in 29 states and 7 Union 
territories28 or in six geographical zones29 identified that almost 76% of households were using 
adequately iodized salt. Among them, 13 states reached universal salt iodization (i.e., more than 
90% of households had access to iodized salt). Another recent study done in the rural, urban and 
urban slum areas in north and south India used the best preferred method to measure salt intake i.e., 
the 24Hr urinary salt excretion method and reported a mean weighted salt intake of 9-10 g/d31 
which corroborates well with the level of intakes derived from the systematic review16. 

 

According to mUIC, the biomarker used for iodine status, the India Iodine study28, conducted 
during 2018-19, among 21,406 households from 29 states and 7 UTs, the mUIC in WRA women 
was 178 μg/L, while it was 173 μg/L in both the pregnant and lactating women, indicating adequate 
iodine status. In another recently (2019) completed CNNS study32, iodine status (mUIC) was 
adequate among preschool children (215 μg/L), school-age children (175 μg/L) and adolescents 
(173 μg/L), pan India, except in Tamil Nadu where mUIC was >300 μg/L in all the three age 
groups. The reason for this remains elusive.   
  

206 
 



References  

1. Hetzel BS.  The Story of Iodine Deficiency - An International challenge in Nutrition. Oxford 
Publications, 1989. 

2. Pandav CS and Rao AR. Iodine deficiency disorders in livestock - Ecology & economics. Oxford 
Publications, 1977. 

3. Sooch SS, Deo MG, Karmarkar MG, Kochupillai N, Ramachandran K, Ramalingaswami V. The Kangra 
valley experiment: prevention of Himalayan endemic goitre with iodinated salt. Acta Endocrinologica. 
Supplementum. 1973 Oct; 179:110. 

4. National Nutrition Policy, Government of India, Department of Women & Child Development, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development, New Delhi, 1993. 

5. Gopalan C. The National Goitre Control Programme - A Sad Story, Bulletin of Nutrition Foundation of 
India, July 1981. 

6. Epidemiological Survey of Endemic Goitre and Endemic Cretinism. An Indian Council of Medical 
Research Task Force Study, 1989. 

7. Current status of IDD in select districts of different regions of the country. National Institute of Nutrition, 
Hyderabad, 2003. 

8. Sankar R, Moorthy D, Pandav CS, Sangita Tiwari J, Karmarkar MG. Tracking progress towards 
sustainable elimination of iodine deficiency disorders in Bihar. Indian Journal of Paediatrics. 2006; 
73(9):799-802. 

9. Ategbo EA, Sankar R, Schultink W, van der Haar F, Pandav CS.  An assessment of progress toward 
universal salt iodization in Rajasthan, India, using iodine nutrition indicators in school-aged children and 
pregnant women from the same households. Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2008;17(1):56-
62. 

10. Patro BK, Saboth P, Zodpey S, Shukla A, Karmarkar MG, Pandav CS. Tracking progress toward 
elimination of iodine deficiency disorders in Jharkhand, India. Indian Journal of Community Medicine. 
2008;33:182-5 

11. IDD & Nutrition Cell, Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
Government of India, New Delhi (2006).  

12. Universalization of access to iodized salt – A mid-decade goal. The Salt Department, Ministry of Industry, 
1994. 

13. Johnson C, Santos JA, Sparks E, Raj TS, Mohan S, Garg V, Rogers K, Maulik PK, Prabhakaran D, Neal 
B, Webster J. Sources of dietary salt in north and south India estimated from 24 hour dietary recall. 
Nutrients. 2019 Feb; 11(2):318. 

14. NNMB. Diet  and  nutritional  status  of  rural  population,  prevalence  of  hypertension  and  diabetes  
among  adults  and  infant  and  young  child  feeding  practices. Report of third repeat survey. NNMB 
Technical Report No: 26. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, Indian Council of Medical Research-
National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR-NIN), Hyderabad, 2012. 

15.  NNMB. Diet and Nutritional status of Urban Population in India and prevalence of obesity, 
hypertension, diabetes and hyperlipidemia in urban men and women- a brief NNMB urban nutrition 
report. NNMB Technical Report No.27. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, Indian Council of 
Medical Research-National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR-NIN), Hyderabad, 2017. 

16. Johnson C, Praveen D, Pope A, Raj TS, Pillai RN, Land MA, Neal B. Mean population salt consumption 
in India: a systematic review. Journal of hypertension. 2017 Jan 1;35(1):3-9. 

17. FSSAI. (Food Safety Standards Authority of India). Food Safety and Standards (Fortification of Foods) 
Regulations, 2018. In: The Gazette of India: Extraordinary (PART 111, Section 4). Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Govt. of India. New Delhi, India. 2018. https://fssai.gov.in/upload/ 
uploadfiles/files/Gazette_Notification_Food_Fortification_10_08_2018.pdf. 

207 
 



18. Longvah T, Toteja GS, Bulliyya G, Raghuvanshi RS, Jain S, Rao V, Upadhya A. Stability of added 
iodine in different Indian cooking processes. Food chemistry. 2012 Feb 15; 130(4):953-9. 

19. Rana R, Raghuvanshi RS. Effect of different cooking methods on iodine losses. Journal of food science 
and technology. 2013 Dec 1; 50(6):1212-6. 

20. Dodd NS and Swaroop Dighe. Iodine content of diets of the people of different regions living in Bombay. 
Journal of Food Science & Technology. 1993; 30(2):134-136.  

21. Goindi G, Karmarkar MG, Kapil U, Jagannathan J. Estimation of losses of iodine during different cooking 
procedures. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 1995 Jun; 4(2):225-7. 

22. Institute of Medicine (US) Panel on Micronutrients. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin 
K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, 
Vanadium, and Zinc. 8, Iodine. 2001; 258-289. 

23. Joint FAO/WHO. Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. A report of the  joint 
FAO/WHO expert consultation, Bangkok, Thailand, 21-30 September 1998, Second Edition, 2004. 

24. WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD. Recommended iodine levels in salt and guidelines for monitoring their adequacy 
effectiveness. World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund and International Council for 
Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders, 1997. 

25. WHO Secretariat, Andersson M, de Benoist B, Delange F and Zupan J. Prevention and control of iodine 
deficiency in pregnant and lactating women and in children less than 2-years-old: conclusions and 
recommendations of the Technical Consultation.  Public Health Nutrition. 10(12A):1606-11, 2007. 

26. ICMR. A draft report of the expert committee on to examine the allowance of vitamins/minerals of more 
than one RDA in health or dietary supplements and nutraceuticals and safe upper limits. Indian Council 
of Medical Research, New Delhi, India. 2018. 

27. International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-
4), 2015-16: India. Mumbai: IIPS. 2017. 

28. Nutrition International, ICCIDD, AIIMS (New Delhi) and Kantar. India Iodine Survey 2018-19 National 
Report, New Delhi, India. 2019. 

29. Pandav CS, Yadav K, Salve HR, Kumar R, Goel AD, & Chakrabarty A. High national and sub-national 
coverage of iodised salt in India: Evidence from the first National Iodine and Salt Intake Survey (NISI) 
2014–2015. Public health nutrition. 2018; 21(16), 3027-3036. 

30. WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD. Assessment of iodine deficiency disorders and monitoring their elimination: a 
guide for programme managers, 3rd ed. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2007. (http://whqlibdoc. 
who.int/publications/2007/9789241595827_eng.pdf. 

31. Johnson C, Mohan S, Rogers K, Shivashankar R, Thout SR, Gupta P, He FJ, MacGregor GA, Webster J, 
Krishnan A, Maulik PK. Mean dietary salt intake in urban and rural areas in India: a population survey 
of 1395 persons. Journal of the American Heart Association. 2017 Jan 6; 6(1).  

32. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Government of India, UNICEF and Population 
Council. Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS) National Report. New Delhi. 2019. 
Available from https://nhm.gov.in/WriteReadData/l892s/1405796031571201348.pdf. 

208 
 



 
 

 12.  WATER SOLUBLE VITAMINS 
 

12.1. THIAMINE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Thiamine is a water-soluble vitamin and occurs in three forms as thiamine monophosphate 
(TMP), thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) and free thiamine. In animals, TPP is involved in oxidative 
decarboxylation of α-ketoacids like pyruvate, α-ketoglutarate and ketoacids derived from branched 
chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine and valine). The products of these reactions - acetyl CoA, 
succinyl CoA and appropriate derivatives of branched chain amino acids play important roles in 
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. TPP is also involved in the transketolase reaction- an important 
reaction of the pentose phosphate pathway. This pathway generates pentose phosphates needed for 
synthesis of nucleic acids and NADPH used for fatty acid synthesis, and generation of reduced 
glutathione1,2. 
 

Dietary sources 
 

Rich sources of thiamine include whole grain cereals, nuts & oil seeds, legumes, green leafy 
vegetables (spinach, fenugreek leaves, gogu), beans, capsicum, peas, apricot, custard apple, green 
chillies, garlic, spices & condiments, organ meats, pork, liver, eggs, and milk & milk products3. Rice 
bran, wheat bran and wheat germ are also rich sources of thiamine. Thiamine losses occur during 
milling and polishing of grains, cooking and preservation of foods and processes like baking (29-30%), 
pasteurization of milk (10-20%) and ultraviolet irradiation. On an average, about 40-50% of the 
vitamin present in raw foods is lost during processing and cooking as practised in Indian homes. 
Tannic acid contained in foods like tea and betel nut destroys thiamine.   
 

12.1.1. Thiamine intake and deficiency in India 
 

Countrywide surveys conducted by the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (2012) in rural 
populations show that the median intake of the vitamin4 is comparable to earlier RDA5. About 77% 
households meet  ≥70% RDA, and only 10% consume less than 50% of the RDA. In urban population, 
the average intake of the vitamin is 1.2 mg/day for adult men and 1.0 mg/day for adult women 
(NNMB urban survey unpublished observations). Recently, a study among the apparently healthy 
urban adult population reported the median intake of thiamine as 1.2 mg/day (men) and 0.8 mg/day 
(women)6. 

 

Inadequate intake is the major cause of thiamine deficiency in India. Relatively higher energy 
intakes from foods deficient in thiamine would reduce the vitamin/energy ratio below the requirement 
(0.5 mg/1000 kcal) and precipitate thiamine deficiency. Deficiency also occurs with the intake of raw 
fish containing the enzyme thiaminase that destroys thiamine. Secondary thiamine deficiency occurs in 
chronic diseases where there are several metabolic changes. Dry (paralytic) and wet beriberi 
(oedematous) is the ultimate disease manifestation. Alcoholism associated with poor quality diet, low 
in thiamine leads to Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. Milder deficiency may result in neuropathies 
manifested by tingling and numbness in the extremities. While beriberi used to be rampant in India 
in the early decades of this century, now its prevalence is rare. This change cannot be explained 
entirely on the basis of dietary improvement. Ban on excessive polishing of rice and dietary 
diversification may have contributed to it. In one study, young women from Hyderabad and Mumbai 
did not show any evidence of thiamine deficiency as judged by the erythrocyte transketolase activity 
coefficient (ETK-AC) test7. A recent study from the National Institute of Nutrition estimated the 
different forms of thiamine (TMP, TPP and thiamine) directly in whole blood by reverse-phase HPLC 

209 
 



 
 

method with fluorescence detection among the apparently healthy urban adult population. 
Considering TPP (the biological active form of thiamine) levels <66 nmol/L as deficient, the study 
showed that 10% women and 13% men were deficient6. Though, healthy adults have an estimated 
total body thiamine concentration of 25–30 mg, due to rapid metabolism and turnover of thiamine, 
and an estimated biological half-life of 9–18 days, regular recommended dietary intake is necessary8. 
Large single doses are absorbed poorly. 
 

Thiamine status is often assessed by measuring the urinary excretion of the vitamin in a 24-h 
collection of urine or before and after the load of thiamine. Measurement of ETK activity and its in 
vitro stimulation (TPP effect) is more commonly used index for assessing thiamine status. TPP effect 
greater than 15% (ETK-AC >1.15) indicates thiamine deficiency. Blood thiamine levels have 
received little attention because of the difficulty in measuring small amounts of the vitamin.  
 

12.1.2. Previous ICMR recommendations 
 

a. Adults 
 

 Since the vitamin is needed for energy utilization, its requirement is related to calorie intake. 
Several early studies showed that beriberi is seen among populations whose thiamine intake is less 
than 0.12 mg/1000 kcal (4184 kJ)9. However, intakes above 0.3 mg/1000 kcal are consistent with no 
signs and symptoms of beriberi9,10. Measurement of biochemical indices such as intake at which there 
is a steep increase in urinary excretion of thiamine (at low levels of intake very little intact thiamine 
is excreted in urine), and maximum levels of ETK activity, in systematic depletion-repletion studies 
done on human volunteers in India and elsewhere indicate 0.25-0.35 mg/1000 kcal as the minimum 
requirement of thiamine for adults9-11. Similarly, Institute of Medicine (IOM, 1998), estimated the 
requirement based on metabolic studies (depletion-repletion studies) taking into account the ETK 
activity, urinary thiamine excretion and their dietary intakes12. Making allowance for cooking losses, 
National Research Council (NRC, USA) has suggested a dietary allowance of 0.5 mg/1000 kcal9. In 
1989, ICMR10  had made similar recommendation and in the absence of any new evidence, the same 
were retained in 2010 recommendations. However, minimum daily allowance of 1.0 mg of thiamine 
is recommended even if the calorie intake is less than 2000 kcal. While ICMR recommendations for 
adults are related to physical activity, FAO/WHO13 and NRC9 give a single figure for adult men and 
women (Table 12.1a). 
 

b. Pregnancy and lactation 
 

 Earlier, ICMR Committee recommended 0.5 mg thiamine/1000 kcal (0.2 mg-300 kcal) 
assuming that the additional calorie allowance will take care of the extra thiamine requirement during 
pregnancy. The recommendations of FAO/WHO and NRC (1989) are slightly higher (Table 12.1a). 
FAO/WHO recommends additional 0.3 mg during pregnancy.  
 
 A well-nourished Western woman secretes about 0.2 mg thiamine per day in breast milk. Based 
on this, NRC9 has recommended additional thiamine allowance of 0.5 mg throughout lactation to 
accommodate thiamine secretion in milk and metabolism of additional calories. Indian mothers from 
low-income groups secrete only 15 g thiamine/100 ml milk9,14 and after supplementation it goes up 
to 20 g thiamine/100 ml.  With a milk output of 700 ml, the maximum secreted through milk would 
be 0.14 mg. The lower level of milk thiamine even after supplementation may be because of 
inadequate utilization due to associated calorie and protein deficiency. The additional allowance 
recommended by the ICMR5,10 on the basis of additional calorie allowance is 0.3 mg for 0-6 months 
of lactation and 0.2 mg for 6-12 months. This level tends to be lower than the recommendations of 
FAO/WHO as well as NRC (1989) (Table 12.1a).  
 
 

210 
 



 
 

Table 12.1a: Comparison of ICMR, FAO/WHO and NRC Recommendations for Thiamine 
 

ICMR FAO/WHO NRC IOM 
Category / Age 2010 2004 1989 2006 

mg/day 
0-6 m 0.2 0.2 0.3 - 

Infants 
6-12 m 0.3 0.3 0.4 - 
1-3 y 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.5 

Children 4-6 y 0.7 0.6 0.9 
0.6 (4-8 y) 

7–9 y 0.8 0.9 1.0 (7-10 y) 
10-12 y 1.1 1.2 1.3 (11-14 y) 0.9 (9-13 y) 

Boys 13-15 y 1.4 1.2  
1.2 (14-18 y) 

16-18 y 1.5 1.2 1.5 (15-18 y) 
10-12 y 1.0 1.1 1.3 (11-14 y) 0.9 (9-13 y) 

Girls 13-15 y 1.2 1.1  
1.0 (14-18 y) 

16-18 y 1.2 1.1 1.3 (15-18 y) 
Sedentary-1.2 

1.7 (19-50 y) 
Men Moderate-1.4 1.3 1.2 

1.4 (50+ y) 
Heavy-1.7 
Sedentary-1.0 

1.3 (19-50 y) 
Women NPNL Moderate-1.1 1.1 1.1 

1.2 (50+ y) 
Heavy-1.4 

Pregnant + 0.2 1.4 1.5 1.4 
0-6 m +0.3 1.5 1.6 1.4 

Lactating 
6-12 m +0.2 1.5 1.6 1.4 

 

c. Infants and children 
 

 The requirement for infants less than 6 months of age is generally computed from the quantity 
available through breast milk of healthy well-nourished mothers.  Assuming a level of 20 g/100 ml 
and 700 ml of breast milk output, the RDA for infants, 0-6 months is 0.3 mg/1000 kcal or 0.2 mg/day.  
 

12.1.3. Current recommendations for thiamine 
 

Estimation of thiamine requirement based on erythrocyte transketolase activity coefficient 
(ETK-AC) 
 

The requirement of thiamine is estimated by plotting EKT-AC values versus dietary thiamine 
intake data obtained from healthy human adult population studies28-36. Average requirement (EAR) 
was calculated from regression analysis (Figure 12.1a). The acceptable cut-off used for ETK-AC is 
1.1537. The RDA is defined as equal to the EAR plus twice the standard deviation (SD). Standard 
deviation of requirements is calculated from the EAR and the Coefficient of Variation (CV). 
Assuming a CV of 10%, as the information is not available on the SD of the requirement for thiamine, 
the RDA for thiamine was then determined as EAR+2 (EAR*0.1). The simulated requirement 
distribution for thiamine based on the ETK-AC cut-off with assumed normal distribution for adult 
men and women is presented in Figure 12.1b, which shows an EAR of thiamine is 1.18 and 
corresponding RDA is 1.41 for adult men. Similarly, EAR of thiamine is 1.14 and corresponding 
RDA is 1.36 for adult women. 

 
 

211 
 



 
 

Figure 12.1a. The ETK-AC in relation to dietary intake in both genders 
 

Men Women 
 

 
Figure 12.1b. Distribution of the requirements in both genders 

 

Men Women 
 

During pregnancy, the additional allowance of 0.2 mg of thiamine based on the additional 
calorie allowance (350 kcal) of current recommendations would take care of maternal and foetal 
growth. During lactation, Indian mothers with a milk output of 700 ml may secrete a maximum of 
0.14 mg of thiamine through milk. The additional allowance of 0.33 mg of thiamine for 0-6 months 
of lactation and 0.29 mg of thiamine for 6-12 months based on the additional calorie allowance [600 
kcal (0-6 months), 520 kcal (6-12 months)] of current recommendations. The current 
recommendations for thiamine across age groups are given in Table 12.1b. 

 
12.1.4. Tolerable upper limit for thiamine 
 

There is no Tolerable Upper Limit (TUL) identified on the data available. While a few studies 
in India used 1-3 mg/ day of thiamine involving 5-15 year boys/ girls or women, other studies have 
used 100-600 mg/day on adults under various conditions. Further, the IOM (1998) also states that 
there is no adverse effect associated with excess thiamine intake from foods or supplements in healthy 
individuals12. The evidence from the limited data is not sufficient for a quantitative risk assessment 
and therefore no TUL can be derived for thiamine.  

212 
 



 
 

Table 12.1b: Current recommendations for Thiamine across age groups 
 

Age group (y) EAR (mg/d) RDA (mg/d) 

Infants (0-6m) - 0.2(AI) 
           (6-12m) - 0.4(AI) 
Children (1-3 y) 0.6 0.7 
             (4-6 y) 0.8 0.9 
             (7-9 y) 1.0 1.1 
Boys (10-12 y) 1.3 1.5 

Girls (10-12 y) 1.2 1.4 
Boys (13-15 y) 1.6 1.9 
Girls (13-15 y) 1.3 1.6 
Boys (16-18 y) 1.9 2.2 
Girls (16-18 y) 1.4 1.7 
Adult Men   
           Sedentary  1.2 1.4 
           Moderate 1.5 1.8 
           Heavy  1.9 2.3 
Adult Women   
           Sedentary  1.1 1.4 
           Moderate 1.4 1.7 
           Heavy 1.8 2.2 
Pregnant 1.6 2.0 

Lactating (0-6m) 1.7 2.1 
              (6-12m) 1.7 2.1 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

213 
 



 
 

References 
 

1. Manzetti S, Zhang J and van der Spoel D. Thiamin function, metabolism, uptake, and transport. 
Biochemistry. 2014; 53, 821–835. 

2. Combs. The vitamins: fundamental aspects in nutrition and health. Elsevier Academic Press, Boston. 2018. 

3. Longvah T, Ananthan R, Bhaskarachary K, Venkaiah K. In: Longvah T, editor. Indian Food Composition 
Tables: National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad; 2017. 

4. NNMB. Diet and nutritional status of rural population. Prevalence of hypertension and diabetes among 
adults and infants and young child feeding practices. NNMB-Report of the third survey Technical Report 
No.26. National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad. 2012. 

5. ICMR. Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A report of the expert 
group of the Indian Council of Medical Research National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad; 2010. 

6. Sivaprasad M, Shalini T, Reddy PY, Seshacharyulu M, Madhavi G, Kumar BN, Reddy GB. Prevalence of 
vitamin deficiencies in an apparently healthy urban adult population: Assessed by subclinical status and 
dietary intakes. Nutrition. 2019 Jul 1; 63:106-13. 

7. WHO Task Force on oral contraceptives.  Impact of hormonal contraceptives vis-a-vis non-hormonal 
factors on vitamin status of malnourished women in India and Thailand.  Human Nutrition.  Clinical 
Nutrition. 40C: 205-200, 1986. 

8. European Food Safety Authority. Dietary reference values for thiamine. EFSA Journal 2016; 14(12):4653. 
doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2016.4653. 

9. National Research Council. Recommended dietary allowances 10thed. National Academy Press 
Washington DC.  FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Human Vitamin and Mineral Requirements. 1989. 

10. ICMR. Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A Report of the Expert 
Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research. National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 1989. 

11. Bamji MS. Transketolase activity and urinary excretion of thiamin in the assessment of thiamin-nutrition 
status of Indians. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1970 Jan 1; 23(1):52-8. 

12. Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. 
Dietary reference intakes for thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, folate, vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, 
biotin, and choline. National Academies Press (US); 1998. 

13. Joint FAO/WHO. Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. A report of the  joint FAO/WHO 
expert consultation, Bangkok, Thailand, 21-30 September 1998, Second Edition, 2004. 

14. Belavady B and Gopalan C.  Effect of dietary supplementation on the composition of breast milk.  Indian 
Journal of Medical Research. 1960; 48:518-523. 

15. Sauberlich HE, Herman YF, Stevens CO, Herman RH. Thiamin requirement of the adult human. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1979; 32: 2237–2248. 

16. E J van der Beeka, W van Dokkuma, M Wedela, J Schrijvera and H van den Berga. Thiamin, riboflavin 
and vitamin B6: impact of restricted intake on physical performance in man. Journal of the American 
College of Nutrition, 1994, Vol. 13, No. 6, 629-640. 

17. Wood B, Gijsbers A, Goode A, Davis S, Mulholland J, Breen K. A study of partial thiamin restriction in 
human volunteers. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1980; 33:848–861. 

18. Ziporin ZZ, Nunes WT, Powell RC, Waring PP, Sauberlich HE. Thiamine requirement in the adult human 
as measured by urinary excretion of thiamine metabolites. Journal of Nutrition. 1965; 85:297–304. 

19. N Tasevska, SA Runswick, A McTaggart and SA Bingham.Twenty-four-hour urinary thiamine as a 
biomarker for the assessment of thiamine intake. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2008; 62, 1139–
1147. 

20. Gontzea I, Gorcea V, Popescu F. Biochemical assessment of thiamin status in patients with neurosis. 
Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism. 1975; 19(3-4):153-7. 

21. Oldham HG. Thiamine requirements of women. NYASA. 1962 Apr; 98(2):542-9. 

214 
 



 
 

22. Oldham HG, Davis MV, Roberts LJ. Thiamine excretions and blood levels of young women on diets 
containing varying levels of the B vitamins, with some observations on niacin and pantothenic acid. 
Journal of Nutrition. 1946; 32:163–180. 

23. Hathaway ML, Strom JE. A comparison of thiamine synthesis and excretion in human subjects on 
synthetic and natural diets. Journal of Nutrition. 1946; 32:1. 

24. Tomiko Tsuji, Tsutomu Fukuwatari, Satoshi Sasaki, Katsumi Shibata. Urinary excretion of vitamin B1, 
B2, B6, niacin, pantothenic acid, folate and vitamin C correlates with dietary intakes of free-living elderly, 
female Japanese. Nutrition Research 30 (2010) 171–178. 

25. Leo L Hardt and Eugene U. Still. Thiamin in Sweat. Experimental Biology and Medicine. December 1, 
1941. 

26. Eric J Vander Beek,Wim van Dokkum, Jaap Schrijver, Michel Wedel, Anthony WK Gaillard, Anneke 
Wesstra, Henk Van de Weerd and Ruud J J Hermus. Thiamin, riboflavin, and vitamins B-6 and C: impact 
of combined restricted intake on functional performance in man. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
1988; 48:1451-62. 

27. Fukuwatari T, Yoshida E, Takahashi K, Shibata K. Effect of fasting on the urinary excretion of water-
soluble vitamins in humans and rats. Journal of nutritional science and vitaminology. 2010; 56(1):19-26. 

28. Nicholas P. O'Rourke, Valda W. Bunker, Anita J. Thomas, Paul M. Finglas, Angela L. Bailey, Barbara E. 
Clayton. Thiamine status of healthy and institutionalized elderly subjects: analysis of dietary intake and 
biochemical indices. Age and Ageing. 1990; 19:325-329. 

29. J. Mataix, P. Aranda, C. Sa´nchez, M. A. Montellano, E. Planells and J. Llopis. Assessment of thiamin 
(vitamin B1) and riboflavin (vitamin B2) status in an adult Mediterranean population. British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2003; 90, 661–6. 

30. Itoh R, Suyama Y. Socio-demographic factors and life-styles affecting micronutrient status in an 
apparently healthy elderly Japanese population. Journal of Nutrition for the Elderly. 1995 Jun 8; 14(2-
3):39-54. 

31. Feili Lo Yang, Pei-Chun Liao, Yung-Ying Chen, Jui-Line Wang and Ning-Sing Shaw.  Prevalence of 
thiamin and riboflavin deficiency among the elderly in Taiwan. Asia Pacific Journal Clinical Nutrition 
2005; 14 (3):238-243. 

32. M.J. Costa de Carvalho JC. Guilland D. Moreau V. Boggio F Fuchs. Vitamin status of healthy subjects in 
Burgundy (France). Annals of Nutrition Metabolism. 1996; 40:24-51. 

33. Pascal Millet, Jean C Guilland, Francoise Fuchs and Jacques Klepping. Nutrient intake and vitamin status 
of healthy French vegetarians and non-vegetarians. American Journal Clinical Nutrition. 1989; 50:718-27. 

34. McKay DL, Perrone G, Rasmussen H, Dallal G, Hartman W, Cao G, Prior RL, Roubenoff R, Blumberg 
JB. The effects of a multivitamin/mineral supplement on micronutrient status, antioxidant capacity and 
cytokine production in healthy older adults consuming a fortified diet. Journal of the American College of 
Nutrition. 2000 Oct 1; 19(5):613-21. 

35. Mikael Fogelholm. Micronutrient status in females during a 24-week fitness-type exercise program. 
Annals of Nutrition Metabolism. 1992; 36:209-218. 

36. Guilland JC, Penaranda TH, Gallet CO, Boggio VI, Fuchs FR, Klepping JA. Vitamin status of young 
athletes including the effects of supplementation. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 1989 Aug; 
21(4):441-9. 

37. Bamji MS, Krishnaswamy K, Brahmam GN, editors. Textbook of human nutrition. Oxford & IBH; 2016. 

 

 

  

215 
 



 
 

12.2. RIBOFLAVIN 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 Riboflavin-derived coenzymes, flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin adenine dinucleotide 
(FAD) are cofactors of numerous enzymes involved in oxidation-reduction reactions and in energy 
production via the respiratory chain1. Being a cofactor for the enzymes like glutathione reductase 
(GR), riboflavin is involved in antioxidant activity and it is also required for the metabolism of other 
vitamins like vitamin B6, niacin and vitamin K. In addition, FAD is involved as a cofactor in one-
carbon metabolism2. 
 

Dietary Sources 
 

 Rich dietary sources of riboflavin are milk, liver, kidney, heart, egg white, green leafy 
vegetables, legumes, mushrooms and almonds. Lean meat, beef, poultry, cheese, beans, brinjal, 
papaya, green chillies, garlic and spices & condiments contain fair amounts3. Major amount of 
vitamin in grains is present in the germ and bran. About 7% of flavin in flesh foods may be present 
as 8α-(amino acid) - FAD covalently attached to certain flavoproteins. The 8α-(amino acid) riboflavin 
is absorbed but biologically inactive. Although heat stable, riboflavin is destroyed in solution when 
exposed to light. Cooking losses of riboflavin in Indian preparations is about 20%4. 
 

12.2.1. Riboflavin intake and deficiency in India 
 

Dietary deficiency of riboflavin is rampant in India. Recent NNMB surveys show that the 
average (% RDA) intake of riboflavin is 47% (men) and 31.5% (women) in rural population5. In 
urban population, the average intake of the vitamin is 0.8 mg/day for adult men and 0.7 mg/day for 
adult women (NNMB urban survey unpublished observations). Recently, a study among the 
apparently healthy urban adult population reported the median intake of riboflavin as 0.9 mg/day 
(men) and 0.7 mg/day (women)6. Erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity coefficient (EGR-AC) 
test has been used in place of urinary excretion method and RBC levels for riboflavin deficiency. A 
study by Bamji et al, showed that more than 70% of women and children from low-income groups 
have biochemical evidence of riboflavin deficiency as judged by the EGR-AC test7. A recent study 
from the ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition estimated the different forms of riboflavin (FMN, FAD 
and riboflavin) directly in whole blood by reverse-phase HPLC method with fluorescence detection 
among the apparently healthy urban adult population. Considering FAD (the biological active form 
of riboflavin) levels <228 nmol/L as deficient, the study showed that 45% women and 54% men were 
deficient6. 

 

While dietary inadequacy of riboflavin is the major factor, studies from Hyderabad showed that 
respiratory infections also contribute to tissue depletion8. Respiratory infections increase riboflavin 
utilization leading to mobilization of the vitamin from the tissues to blood and increase urinary 
excretion9. Negative nitrogen balance also results in excess urinary losses10. Exercise leads to 
increased riboflavin requirement as judged by EGR-AC values11. Riboflavin deficiency is seen 
associated with prolonged fevers, trauma, malabsorption, hyperthyroidism and malignancy. 

 

The well-established clinical signs of riboflavin deficiency are muco-cutaneous lesions of the 
mouth- angular stomatitis, glossitis, chelosis. In severe deficiency other areas like scrotum are also 
involved. The less recognized consequences of riboflavin deficiency are: impaired psychomotor 
performance12-15, reduced iron absorption due to lower conversion of ferric iron to ferrous iron, and 
risk of anemia16 and reduced skin collagen maturity (cross-linking)17. Diminished visual acuity can 
also be attributed to riboflavin deficiency.  
 

216 
 



 
 

12.2.2. Previous ICMR recommendations 
 

Some of the earlier controlled, long-term studies in humans fed deficient or low-riboflavin diet 
suggest that on intakes close to 0.5 mg/1000 kcal, urinary excretion was only slightly higher than 
intakes seen in individuals with riboflavin deficiency signs8, 9. This has led to recommendation of 0.6 
mg/1000 kcal8, 9. Similar value emerged through controlled depletion-repletion study in adult Indian 
volunteers18. The enzyme EGR showed linear increase with riboflavin intake and reached maximum 
levels at intakes close to 0.5 mg /1000 kcal. After allowing for cooking losses, the earlier Committee 
recommended 0.6 mg/1000 kcal4. A minimum intake of 1.2 mg/day was recommended even if the 
calorie intake is lower than 2000 kcal (Table 12.2a). Similarly Institute of Medicine (IOM, 1998) 
estimated the requirement based on metabolic studies (depletion-repletion studies) taking into 
account the EGR activity, urinary thiamine excretion and their dietary intakes19. 

 

The lower recommendation of FAO/WHO20 (Table 12.2a) is based on some earlier work 
indicating tissue saturation at daily intakes higher than 1.1 mg. The activity levels are not indicated. 
Neither WHO/FAO, nor NRC based their recommendations on energy intake as ICMR Committee 
does (Table 12.2a). 
 

a. Riboflavin requirement in pregnancy and lactation 
 

During pregnancy, there is an increase in the EGR-AC21,22. In a depletion-repletion study, 
Kuizon et al23 reported that 0.7 mg riboflavin/1000 kcal were required to lower EGR-AC in 4 of 8 
pregnant women to 1.3, whereas 0.41 mg/1000 kcal was required for 5 of non-pregnant women.  In 
a study of 372 pregnant women in USA24, maternal riboflavin intake was positively associated with 
foetal growth. 

 

NRC has recommended an additional intake of 0.3 mg/day during pregnancy to allow for 
additional demand for maternal and foetal tissues25. ICMR has however retained the riboflavin/calorie 
ratio at 0.6, and recommended additional intake of 0.2 mg during pregnancy4.  

 

The mean riboflavin content of milk of low-income Indian women is less than 30 g/100ml20,26. 
With supplementation, it can be raised to a maximum of 30 g /100 ml20. The earlier Committee felt 
that this loss could be compensated with an additional allowance of 0.3 mg for the first 6 months of 
lactation and 0.2 mg for the subsequent 6 months of lactation on the basis of the additional calorie 
allowance. This level is however lower than the WHO/FAO as well as NRC recommendation of 
additional 0.5 mg riboflavin during lactation (Table 12.2a). Their calculation is based on 0.26 mg and 
0.21 mg riboflavin lost/day during first and second 6 months of lactation (milk volume 750 ml and 
600 ml respectively), with utilization efficiency of 70%, and coefficient of variation of milk 
production as 12.5%. The earlier recommendation was retained in the absence of reliable new 
information on utilization efficiency of riboflavin for milk production.  

 
b. Riboflavin requirement of infants and children 
 

Riboflavin deficiency as judged by the EGR-AC values was seen in infants aged 1-6 months 
who received breast milk containing about 22 g riboflavin/100 ml26. Assuming milk output of about 
700 ml during the first six months of lactation, it would appear that riboflavin intake of around 0.15 
mg/day is inadequate for the infants. In the absence of any data on riboflavin requirement of older 
infants and children, the earlier recommendation of 0.6 mg /1000 kcal is retained. WHO/FAO and 
NRC have recommended additional 0.5 mg per day throughout lactation. FAO/WHO (1998) had 
recommended riboflavin on a daily basis, which is lower than ICMR Value (Table 12.2a). 

 
 

217 
 



 
 

c. Riboflavin requirement of the elderly 
 

In a control study involving elderly subjects in Guatemala27 in which measurement of urinary 
riboflavin excretion and EGR-AC were used, it was concluded that the requirement of healthy 
individuals aged above 60 years probably does not differ from that for individuals below 51. 

 
Table 12.2a: Comparison of ICMR, FAO/WHO and NRC Recommendations for Riboflavin 

 

ICMR FAO/WHO NRC IOM 
Category / Age 2010 2004 1989 2006 

mg/day 
0-6 m 0.3 0.3 0.4 - 

Infants 
6-12 m 0.4 0.4 0.5 - 
1-3 y 0.6 0.5 0.8 0.5 

Children 4-6 y 0.8 0.6 1.1 
0.6 (4-8 y) 

7–9 y 1.0 0.9 1.2 (7-10 y) 
10-12 y 1.3 1.3 1.5 (11-14 y) 0.9 (9-13 y) 

Boys 13-15 y 1.6 1.3  
1.3 (14-18 y) 

16-18 y 1.8 1.3 1.8 (15-18 y) 
10-12 y 1.2 1.0 1.3 (11-14 y) 0.9 (9-13 y) 

Girls 13-15 y 1.4 1.0  
1.0 (14-18 y) 

16-18 y 1.5 1.0 1.3 (15-18 y) 

Sedentary-1.4 
1.7 (19-50 y) 

Men Moderate-1.6 1.3 1.3 
1.4 (50+ y) 

Heavy-2.1 

Sedentary-1.1 
Women Moderate-1.3 1.1 1.3 1.1 

Heavy-1.7 

Pregnant +0.3 1.4 1.6 1.4 
0-6 m +0.4 1.6 1.8 1.6 

Lactating 
6-12 m +0.3 1.5 1.8 1.6 

*Minimum intake of 1.2 mg/1000 kcal is recommended. 
 
12.2.3. Current recommendations for riboflavin 

Estimation of riboflavin requirement based on functionality [Erythrocyte glutathione reductase 
activity coefficient (EGR-AC)] 

The requirement of riboflavin is estimated by plotting EGR-AC values versus dietary riboflavin 
intake data obtained from human studies31, 32, 34, 38, 39, 41-55. Average requirement (EAR) was calculated 
from regression analysis (Figure 12.2a). The acceptable cut off used for EGR-AC is 1.256. The RDA 
is defined as equal to the EAR plus twice the standard deviation (SD). Standard deviation of 
requirements is calculated from the EAR and the Coefficient of Variation (CV). Assuming a CV of 
10%, as the information is not available on the SD of the requirement for riboflavin, the RDA for 
riboflavin was then determined as EAR+2 (EAR*0.1).The simulated requirement distribution for 
riboflavin based on the EGR-AC cut-off with assumed normal distribution for adult men and women 
is presented in Figure 12.2b, which shows an EAR of riboflavin is 1.64 and corresponding RDA is 
1.96 for adult men. Similarly, EAR of riboflavin is 1.56 and corresponding RDA is 1.87 for adult 
women. 

218 
 



 
 

Figure 12.2a: The EGR-AC in relation to dietary intake in both genders 

Men Women 

 
 

Figure 12.2b: Distribution of the requirements in both genders 

Men Women 
 

During pregnancy, the additional allowance of 0.27 mg of riboflavin based on the additional 
calorie allowance (350 kcal) of current recommendations, would take care of maternal and foetal 
growth. During lactation, the additional allowance of 0.47 mg and 0.4 mg of riboflavin for 0-6 months 
and 6-12 months, respectively, based on the additional calorie allowance [600 kcal (0-6 months), 520 
kcal (6-12 months)] of current recommendations. The current recommendations for riboflavin across 
age groups are given in Table 12.2b. 

 
12.2.4. Tolerable upper limit for riboflavin 
 

There is no Tolerable Upper Limit (TUL) identified on the data available. While a few studies 
in India used 1-3 mg/day of riboflavin involving 5-15-year boys/ girls or women, other studies have 
used 60-400 mg/day on adults under various conditions. Further, the IOM (1998) also states that the 
evidence on adverse effects is not sufficient to set a TUL for riboflavin19. 

219 
 



 
 

Table 12.2b: Current recommendations for Riboflavin across age groups 
 

Age group (y) EAR (mg/d) RDA (mg/d) 

Infants (0-6m) - 0.4(AI) 
           (6-12m) - 0.6(AI) 
Children (1-3 y) 0.8 0.9 
             (4-6 y) 1.1 1.3 
             (7-9 y) 1.3 1.6 
Boys (10-12 y) 1.7 2.1 
Girls (10-12 y) 1.6 1.9 
Boys (13-15 y) 2.2 2.7 
Girls (13-15 y) 1.9 2.2 
Boys (16-18 y) 2.5 3.1 
Girls (16-18 y) 1.9 2.3 
Adult Men   
           Sedentary  1.6 2.0 
           Moderate 2.1 2.5 
           Heavy 2.7 3.2 
Adult Women   
          Sedentary  1.6 1.9 
           Moderate 2.0 2.4 
           Heavy 2.6 3.1 
Pregnant 2.3 2.7 
Lactating (0-6m) 2.5 3.0 
              (6-12m) 2.4 2.9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

220 
 



 
 

References 

1. Said HM and Ross AC. Riboflavin. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, Philadelphia, USA, 2012; 1616 pp. 

2. McKinley MC, McNulty H, McPartlin J, Strain JJ, Pentieva K, Ward M, Weir DG and Scott JM, 2001. 
Low-dose vitamin B-6 effectively lowers fasting plasma homocysteine in healthy elderly persons who are 
folate and riboflavin replete. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 73, 759–764. 

3. Longvah T, Ananthan R, Bhaskarachary K, Venkaiah K. In: Longvah T, editor. Indian Food Composition 
Tables: National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad; 2017. 

4. ICMR. Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A Report of the Expert 
Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research. National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 1989. 

5. NNMB. Diet and nutritional status of rural population. Prevalence of hypertension and diabetes among 
adults and infants and young child feeding practices. Technical Report No.26. Report of the third survey 
National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR), 2012. 

6. Sivaprasad M, Shalini T, Reddy PY, Seshacharyulu M, Madhavi G, Kumar BN, Reddy GB. Prevalence of 
vitamin deficiencies in an apparently healthy urban adult population: Assessed by subclinical status and 
dietary intakes. Nutrition, 2019 Jul 1; 63:106-13. 

7. Bamji MS and Lakshmi AV.  Less recognized micronutrient deficiencies in India. NFI Bull 19(2):5-8, 
1998. 

8. Bamji MS, Bhaskaram P and Jacob CM. Urinary riboflavin excretion and erythrocyte glutathione 
reductase activity in preschool children suffering from upper respiratory infections and measles.  Annals 
of Nutrition Metabolism. 1987; 31:191-196. 

9. Brijlal S, Lakshmi AV. Tissue distribution and turnover of [3H] riboflavin during respiratory infection in 
mice. Metabolism. 1999 Dec 1; 48(12):1608-11. 

10. Pollack H, Bookman JJ. Riboflavin excretion as a function of protein metabolism in the normal, catabolic, 
and diabetic human being. The Journal of laboratory and clinical medicine. 1951 Oct 1; 38(4):561-73. 

11. Soares MJ, Satyanarayana K, Bamjlt MS, Jacob CM, Ramana YV, Rao SS. The effect of exercise on the 
riboflavin status of adult men. British journal of nutrition. 1993 Mar; 69(2):541-51. 

12. Bamji MS, Arya S, Sarma KVR and Radhaiah G.  Impact of long-term, low dose vitamin supplementation 
on vitamin nutrition status and psychomotor performance of rural school boys.  Nutrition Research 2. 
1982; 147-153. 

13. Prasad PA, Bamji MS, Lakshmi AV and Satyanarayana K. Functional impact of riboflavin 
supplementation in urban school children. Nutrition Research10. 1990; 275-281. 

14. Sterner RT and Price WR. Restricted riboflavin: Within subjects’ behavioural effects in humans. Am J 
Clinical Nutrition. 1973; 26:150-160. 

15. Bamji MS, Sarma KVR and Radhaiah G.  Relationship between biochemical and chemical indices of B-
vitamin deficiency. A study in rural school boys.  British Journal of Nutrition. 1979; 41: 431. 

16. Fairweather-Tait SJ, Powers HJ, Minski MJ, Whitehead J and Downes R. Riboflavin deficiency and iron 
absorption in adult Gambian men.  Annals of Nutrition Metabolism. 1992; 36: 34-40. 

17. Prasad R, Lakshmi AV and Bamji MS.  Impaired collagen maturity in vitamin B2 and B6 deficiency - 
probable molecular basis of skin lesions. Biochemical Medicine. 1983; 30: 333-341. 

18. Bamji MS. Glutathione reductase activity in red blood cells and riboflavin nutritional status in humans. 
Clinica Chimica Acta. 1969 Nov 1; 26(2):263-9. 

19. Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. 
Dietary reference intakes for thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, folate, vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, 
biotin, and choline. National Academies Press (US); 1998. 

20. Joint FAO/WHO. Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. A report of the  joint FAO/WHO 
expert consultation, Bangkok, Thailand, 21-30 September 1998, Second Edition, 2004. 

221 
 



 
 

21. Neela J and Raman L. The relationship between maternal nutrition status and spontaneous abortion. Nutr 
Med J India 10: 15, 1997. 

22. Vir SC, Love AH and Thompson W. Riboflavin status during pregnancy. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 1981; 34: 2699-2705. 

23. Kuizon MD, Natera MG, Alberto SP, Perlas LA, Desnacido JA, Avena EM, Tajaon RT, Macapinlac MP. 
Riboflavin requirement of Filipino women. European journal of clinical nutrition. 1992 Apr 1; 46(4):257-
64. 

24. Badart-Smook A, HOUWELINGEN AC, Al MD, Kester AD, Hornstra G. Fetal growth is associated 
positively with maternal intake of riboflavin and negatively with maternal intake of linoleic acid. Journal 
of the American Dietetic Association. 1997 Aug 1; 97(8):867-70. 

25.  National Research Council. Recommended dietary allowances 10thed. National Academy Press 
Washington DC.  FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Human Vitamin and Mineral Requirements. 1989. 

26. Bamji MS, Prema K, Jacob CM, Ramalakshmi BA, Madhavapeddi R. Relationship between maternal 
vitamins B2 and B6 status and the levels of these vitamins in milk at different stages of lactation. A study 
in a low-income group of Indian women. Human nutrition. Clinical nutrition. 1986 Mar; 40(2):119-24. 

27. Boisvert WA, Mendoza I, Castanedac et al.  Riboflavin requirement of healthy elderly humans and its 
relationship to macronutrient composition of the diet.  Journal of Nutrition. 1993; 123: 915-25. 

28. European Food Safety Authority. Dietary reference values for thiamine.  EFSA Journal 2016; 14(12):4653. 
doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2016.4653. 

29. Fukuwatari T, Yoshida E, Takahashi K, Shibata K. Effect of fasting on the urinary excretion of water-
soluble vitamins in humans and rats. Journal of nutritional science and vitaminology. 2010; 56(1):19-26. 

30. Tomiko Tsuji, Tsutomu Fukuwatari, Satoshi Sasaki, Katsumi Shibata. Urinary excretion of vitamin B1, 
B2, B6, niacin, pantothenic acid, folate and vitamin C correlates with dietary intakes of free-living elderly, 
female Japanese. Nutrition Research. 2010; 30: 171–8.  

31. Belko AZ, Obarzanek E, Kalkwarf HJ, Rotter MA, Bogusz S, Miller D, Haas JD, Roe DA. Effects of 
exercise on riboflavin requirements of young women. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1983; 
37:509–517.  

32. Belko AZ, Obarzanek E, Roach R, Rotter M, Urban G, Weinberg S, Roe DA. Effects of aerobic exercise 
and weight loss on riboflavin requirements of moderately obese, marginally deficient young women. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1984; 40:553–61.  

33. Belko AZ, Meredith MP, Kalkwarf HJ, Obarzanek E, Weinberg S, Roach R, McKeon G, Roe DA. Effects 
of exercise on riboflavin requirements: Biological validation in weight reducing women. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition. 1985; 41:270–7.  

34. Soares MJ, Satyanarayana K, Bamji MS, Jacob CM, Ramana YV, Rao SS. The effect of exercise on the 
riboflavin status of adult men. British Journal of Nutrition. 1993; 69:541–51. 

35. Davis MV, Oldham HG, Roberts LJ. Riboflavin excretions of young women on diets containing varying 
levels of the B vitamins. Journal of Nutrition. 1946; 32:143–61. 

36. Winters LR, Yoon JS, Kalkwarf HJ, Davies JC, Berkowitz MG, Haas J, Roe DA. Riboflavin requirements 
and exercise adaptation in older women. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1992; 56:526–32. 

37. Brewer W, Porter T, Ingalls R, Ohlson MA. The urinary excretion of riboflavin by college women. Journal 
of Nutrition. 1946; 32:583–96. 

38. Fu-Liu CS, Fujitaki C and Lewis JS. Riboflavin status: Dietary intake, urinary excretion and erythrocyte 
glutathione reductase coefficient activity of female university students. Nutrition Research, 1986; Vol.6, 
pp. 601-608. 

39. Keith RE, and Alt LA. Riboflavin status of female athletes consuming normal diets. Nutrition Research, 
1991; Vol.11, pp. 727-734. 

222 
 



 
 

40. Oldham H, Lounde E and Porter T. Riboflavin excretions and test dose returns of young women during 
periods of positive and negative nitrogen balance. Journal of Nutrition. 1947 Jul 10; 34(1):69-79. 

41. Mataix J, Aranda P, Sa´nchez C, Montellano MA, Planells E and Llopis J. Assessment of thiamin (vitamin 
B1) and riboflavin (vitamin B2) status in an adult Mediterranean population. British Journal of Nutrition. 
2003; 90: 661–6. 

42. Millet P, Guilland JC, Fuchs F and Klepping J. Nutrient intake and vitamin status of healthy French 
vegetarians and non-vegetarians. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1989; 50:718-27. 

43. Itoh R and Suyama Y. Socio-demographic Factors and Life-Styles Affecting Micronutrient Status in an 
Apparently Healthy Elderly Japanese Population. Journal of Nutrition for the Elderly, Vol 14(2/3)1995. 

44. Costa de Carvalho MJ, Guilland JC, Moreau D, Boggio V, Fuchs F. Vitamin Status of healthy subjects in 
Burgundy (France). Annals of Nutrition Metabolism. 1996; 40:24-51. 

45. McKay DL, Perrone G, Rasmussen H, Dallal G, Hartman W, Cao G, Prior RL, Roubenoff R and Blumberg 
JB. The Effects of a Multivitamin/Mineral Supplement on Micronutrient Status, Antioxidant Capacity and 
Cytokine Production in Healthy Older Adults Consuming a Fortified Diet. Journal of the American College 
of Nutrition. 2000;19(5):613–21. 

46. Fogelholm M. Micronutrient status in females during a 24-week fitness-type exercise program. Ann 
Nutrition Metabolism. 1992; 36:209-218. 

47. Guilland JC, Penaranda T, Gallet C, Boggio V, Fuchs F, Klepping J. Vitamin status of young athletes 
including the effects of supplementation. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1989 Aug; 21(4):441-9.  

48. Yang FL, Liao P-C, Chen Y-Y, Wang J-L and Shaw N-S. Prevalence of thiamin and riboflavin deficiency 
among the elderly in Taiwan. Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2005; 14 (3):238-43. 

49. Hustad S, McKinley MC, McNulty H, Schneede J, Strain JJ, Scott JM and Ueland PM. Riboflavin, 
flavinmononucleotide, and flavin adenine dinucleotide in human plasma and erythrocytes at baseline and 
after low-dose riboflavin supplementation. Clinical Chemistry. 2002; 48, 1571–1577. 

50. Hughes CF, Ward M, Tracey F, Hoey L, Molloy AM, Pentieva K and McNulty H. B-Vitamin Intake and 
Biomarker Status in Relation to Cognitive Decline in Healthy Older Adults in a 4-YearFollow-Up Study. 
Nutrients. 2017; 9: 53. 

51. McKinley MC, McNulty H, McPartlin J, Strain JJ and Scott JM. Effect of riboflavin supplementation on 
plasma homocysteine in elderly people with low riboflavin Status. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2002; 56: 850–856. 

52. Hoey L, McNulty H, Askin N, Dunne A, Ward M, Pentieva K, Strain JJ, Molloy AM, Flynn CA and Scott 
JM. Effect of a voluntary food fortification policy on folate, related B vitamin status, and homocysteine in 
healthy adults. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2007; 86:1405–13. 

53. Madigan SM, Tracey F, McNulty H, Eaton-Evans J, Coulter J, McCartney H and Strain JJ. Riboflavin and 
vitamin B6 intakes and status and biochemical response to riboflavin supplementation in free-living elderly 
people. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1998; 68:389–95. 

54. Majchrzak D, Singer I, Männer M, Rust P, Genser D, Wagner K-H, Elmadfa I. B-Vitamin Status and 
Concentrations of Homocysteine in Austrian Omnivores, Vegetarians and Vegans. Annals of Nutrition 
Metabolism. 2006; 50:485–91. DOI: 10.1159/000095828. 

55. Wright AJA, Southon S, Bailey AL and Finglas PM. Nutrient intake and biochemical status of non-
institutionalized elderly subjects in Norwich: comparison with younger adults and adolescents from the 
same general community. British Journal of Nutrition.1995; 74: 453-75. 

56. Bamji MS, Krishnaswamy K, Brahmam GNV. Textbook of Human Nutrition. 3rded: Oxford & IBH 
Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi; 2009. 

 
 
 
 

223 
 



 
 

12.3. NIACIN 

INTRODUCTION 

Nicotinic acid (niacin) and nicotinamide (niacinamide) are the two forms of vitamin B3 
(niacin). Niacin function as the precursor of nicotinamide nucleotide coenzymes NAD and NADP, 
which are involved in many metabolic processes including glycolysis, tissue respiration, fatty acid 
metabolism and synthesis of macromolecules. 

Niacin can also be synthesised from the essential amino acid tryptophan as its metabolic end 
product and thus dietary tryptophan can spare the requirements of niacin. In considering the dietary 
adequacy of niacin, contribution of both is taken into account. Intakes of both energy and protein 
are known to regulate the efficiency of conversion of tryptophan to niacin1,2. In well-nourished 
individuals 60 mg of tryptophan produce 1 mg of niacin and thus 60 mg tryptophan is considered as 
1 mg niacin equivalents (NE)3. While computing dietary intake of niacin, tryptophan contribution 
as niacin equivalents is added to that of preformed niacin/ nicotinic acid as follows: 

1 mg Niacin Equivalent (NE) = 60 mg Tryptophan 

Dietary sources 

Nicotinic acid is the basic precursor mainly available in the plant foods, particularly in nuts 
and oil seeds while nicotinamide is a degradation product of the pyridine nucleotides that are 
mainly absorbed from animal-based foods, especially liver. 

12.3.1. Niacin intake and deficiency in India 

Though whole grain cereals are satisfactory sources of niacin, mostly present in the esterified 
form, which is unavailable for absorption4,5. In the recent study done at ICMR-NIN, niacin is 
reported to be present more in nuts and oil seeds among the plant foods6. Niacin is more stable than 
other B-vitamins in spite of some inevitable losses in cooking7,8. Based upon studies carried out in 
India, an average loss of 25% in Indian cooking can be assumed. 

Deficiency of niacin leads to development of pellagra (symptoms such as photosensitive 
dermatitis, skin lesions, tongue and mouth soreness, vomiting, diarrhoea, depression and dementia). 
This symptom was seen in endemic form in some parts of India where jowar (sorghum) was used as 
staple. 

12.3.2. Previous ICMR recommendations requirements of adults 

The recommendations of previous ICMR committee along with other global recommendation 
are given in table 12.3. Diet surveys from India show that the average intake of niacin is around 10 
mg daily. Among predominantly rice eaters, intakes are much lower, the values ranging between 5 
and 11 mg per day; together with tryptophan, such diets provide about 6 mg NE per 1000 kcal9. 
Pellagra is rarely seen among this population. Load tests using nicotinic acid have shown that 
subjects consuming 6.5 to 7.2 mg of NE per 1000 kcal have satisfactory niacin status10. Niacin 
intakes of subjects suffering from pellagra have, however, been found to be around 3.6 mg/1000 
kcal - an apparently inadequate intake. 

Joint FAO/WHO Expert Group11 suggested an intake of 5.6 mg NE per 1000 kcal for adults. 
The earlier ICMR Committee recommended 6.6 mg/1000 kcal as adult RDA. The present 
committee have derived similar value by adding 10% CV (20% 2SD) to the EAR of 5.6 mg, 
providing an RDA of 6.7 mg/1000 kcal. EAR requirements for men, NPNL women, children aged 
1-18 years are derived based on energy requirements (EAR=5.6 x energy in kcal/1000) and RDA of 
niacin was determined as EAR+2SD (20% CV).  

224 
 



 
 

Pregnancy and lactation 

Information on the niacin requirements during pregnancy is scanty. Based on the observation 
that urinary excretion of metabolites of tryptophan is higher in pregnant women than in normal 
following an oral load of tryptophan, it has been suggested that conversion of the amino acid into 
niacin is more efficient during pregnancy. The extra allowance of niacin for the additional energy 
intake would cover the niacin needs during pregnancy and has been provided. The nicotinic acid 
content of breast milk of Indian women ranges between 100 and 150 μg per 100 ml and the amount 
lost in a day would thus be between 0.9 and 1.2 mg niacin in the mother12. As in the case of 
pregnancy, niacin intake during lactation will be higher because of higher energy intakes which are 
recommended. The earlier ICMR Committee therefore recommended the same level (density) as in 
the diet of adult non-pregnant woman, to lactating woman and the present committee also used 
similar approach except an additional 1 mg of NE secreted in breast milk is added in addition to the 
additional energy requirements during lactation. 

Infants and children 

In the absence of any reports on the subject or any information on special needs in infants and 
children, the RDA was recommended on the basis of energy requirements by the earlier 
committees. The present committee recommends an AI of 2.0 mg of niacin for infants aged 0-6 
months based on intake of 700 ml of breast milk which contain 1.5 mg/l of niacin11. For infants 
aged 6-12 months, AI of 5.0 mg have been extrapolated based on the energy requirements in adults 
(Tables 12.4). 

Table 12.3: Comparison of ICMR (2010), FAO/WHO and NRC Recommendations for Niacin 

FAO/WHO 
Category /    ICMR 2010 IOM (2006) NRC 1989 

Group (2004) 
Age (mg NE/d) (mg NE/d) (mg NE/d) 

(mg NE/d) 
0-6 m 710 µg/kg - 2 - 

Infants 
6-12 m 650 µg/kg - 4 - 
1-3 y 8 6 6 6 

Children 4-6 y 11 8 (4-8 y) 8 8 
7-9 y 13  12  
10-12 y 15 12 (9-12 y)  12 (9-13 y) 

Boys 13-15 y 16  
14 (14-18 y) 16 (14-18 y) 

16-18 y 17  
10-12 y 13 12 (9-12 y) 12 (9-13 y) 

Girls 13-15 y 14 16 (10-18 y) 
12 (14-18 y) 14 (14-18 y) 

16-18 y 14 
Sedentary 16 

Men 
Moderate 18 16 16 16 

 
Heavy 21 
Sedentary 12 
Moderate 14 14 14 14 
Heavy 16 

Women 
Pregnant +2 18 18 18 
Lactating 0-6 m +4 

17 17 17 
Lactating 6-12 m +3 

 

225 
 



 
 

Table 12.4: Current recommendations for Niacin across age groups 
 

Age Net Energy EAR /   
Category RDA 

Group (Kcal/d) 1000 kcal 

0-6 m 550 2 (AI) 
Infants 

6-12 m 670 5 (AI) 
1-3 y 1010 6 7 

Children 4-6 y 1360 8 9 
7-9 y 1700 10 11 

Boys 10-12 y 2220 12 15 
Girls 10-12 y 2060 12 14 
Boys 13-15 y 2860 16 19 
Girls 13-15 y 2400 13 16 
Boys 16-18 y 3320 19 22 
Girls 16-18 y 2500 14 17 

Sedentary 2110 12 14 
Men Moderate work 2710 15 18 

Heavy 3470 19 23 
Sedentary 1660 9 11 

Moderate work 2130 12 14 
heavy 2720 15 18 

Women 
Pregnant 350 +2 +2.5 

Lactating 0-6 m 600 +4 +5 
7-12 m 520 +4 +5 

 

12.3.3. Tolerable Upper Limit for Niacin 
 

There is no evidence of adverse effects from excess consumption of diet based niacin. Study 
shows that, ingestion of a pharmacological dose ranging from 3-9 g of nicotinic acid daily results in 
various metabolic effects such as increased utilization of muscle glycogen stores, decrease in serum 
lipids and fatty acids mobilization in the adipose tissue during exercise13. 
  

226 
 



 
 

References 

1. Satyanarayana U, Rao BN. Effect of dietary protein level on some key enzymes of the tryptophan-NAD 
pathway. British Journal of Nutrition. 1977 Jul; 38(1):39-45. 

2. Satyanarayana U, Narasinga Rao BS. Effect of diet restriction on some key enzymes of tryptophan-NAD 
pathway in rats. The Journal of nutrition. 1977 Dec 1; 107(12):2213-8. 

3. Horwitt MK, Harvey CC, Rothwell WS, Cutler JL, Haffron D. Tryptophan-niacin relationships in man: 
studies with diets deficient in riboflavin and niacin, together with observations on the excretion of 
nitrogen and niacin metabolites. The Journal of Nutrition. 1956 Oct 1; 60(suppl_1):1-43. 

4. Wall JS, Young MR and Carpenter KJ, Transformation of niacin-containing compounds in corn during 
grain development - relationship to niacin nutritional availability. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry. 1987; 35: 752-8. 

5. Ball GFM, Niacin and tryptophan. In: Bioavailability and analysis of vitamins in foods. Ed Ball GFM. 
Chapman & Hall, London, UK, 319-354, 1998. 

6. Longvah T, Ananthan R, Bhaskarachary K and Venkaiah K. Indian food composition tables. National 
Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research, 2017. 

7. Basu KP, Malakar MC. Destruction of vitamin B, of some vegetables daring cooking and the effect of 
cooking on tree and combined vitamin B, of some foodstuffs. Indian Journal of Medical Research. 1946; 
34:39-43. 

8. Rao PS, Ramasastri BV. Riboflavin and nicotinic acid content of some foods of plant origin. Indian 
Journal of Nutrition and Dietetics. 1969; 6:218-23. 

9. Aykroyd WR, Swaminathan M. The Nicotinic-Acid Content of Cereals and Pellagra. Indian Journal of 
Medical Research. 1940; 27(3). 

10. De HN, Banerjee KC. Nicotinic-acid requirements of Indian adult. Indian Journal of Medical Research. 
1948; 36:335-9. 

11. WHO/FAO (World Health Organization/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 
(2004). Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition: report of a joint FAO/WHO expert 
consultation, Bangkok, Thailand, 21–30 September 1998, 2004. 

12. Deodhar AD, Ramakrishnan CV. Studies on human lactation. (Relation between the dietary intake of 
lactating women and the chemical composition of milk with regard to vitamin content.). Journal of 
Tropical Pediatrics. 1960; 6:44-7. 

13. Darby WJ, McNutt KW and Todhunter EN. Niacin [Diet, disease]. Nutrition Reviews, 1975. 

 

227 
 



 
 

12.4  VITAMIN B6 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 

The term vitamin B6 includes three forms, pyridoxine (PN), pyridoxal (PL), pyridoxamine 
(PM), and their respective 5'-phosphates (PLP, PNP, and PMP). Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), the 
physiologically active coenzyme form of vitamin B6 is involved in 140 distinct enzymatic reactions 
including aminotransferases, decarboxylases, racemases, dehydratases and inside chain cleaving 
enzymes1. Thus, vitamin B6 is needed for important pathways like amino acid metabolism, 
glycogenolysis, heme biosynthesis, gluconeogenesis, synthesis of neurotransmitters like serotonin, 
dopamine, taurine, gama-aminobutyric acid, norepinephrine and histamine. Along with folic acid, 
vitamin B12 and riboflavin, vitamin B6 is needed for the metabolism of homocysteine to cysteine. It 
is also involved in immune system and nucleic acid metabolism. In addition, vitamin B6 plays a 
crucial role in antioxidant mechanism2.   

 

Dietary sources 
 

As per Indian food composition table (IFCT) garlic, cloves, nuts and seeds (walnut, sunflower 
seeds, safflower and pistachio nut), poultry chicken, liver, sugarcane, Oyster mushroom are rich 
sources of  vitamin B6, while milk and milk products, potato, beet root, carrot and cherries, custard 
apple, musk melon are moderate sources3. Pyridoxine and PNP are the predominant forms of the 
vitamin present in the plant foods, sometimes in the form of a glucoside. Whereas in the animal foods 
the major form is pyridoxal and pyridoxal phosphate. The extent to which processing of foods and 
cooking practices destroy depend on the form in which vitamin B6 is present and the method of 
processing. Considerable amounts of pyridoxal and pyridoxal phosphate are lost during cooking, 
whereas pyridoxine content of food is not affected. The approximate cooking loss of B6 in daily meals 
consisting of various dishes was found to be 13%4. 

 

About 5-80% of the naturally occurring vitamin B6 in cereals, legumes, vegetables and fruits is 
present in glycosylated form, predominantly as pyridoxine-5'-D-glucoside. There appears to be an 
inverse relationship between pyridoxine glycoside content of the diet and the bioavailability of 
vitamin B6. About 15% of the total vitamin B6 content as glycosylated pyridoxine had no influence 
on vitamin B6 status of lactating women5. The incomplete bioavailability of glycosylated pyridoxine 
may be a concern of nutrition in diets, which contain high proportion of pyridoxine glycosides and 
provide marginally adequate intake of total vitamin B6. The glucosidal form in which pyridoxine is 
present in normal foods needs to be studied. 

 

12.4.1 Vitamin B6 intake and deficiency 
 

Studies conducted by the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) in urban population 
show that the average intake of vitamin B6  is 1.27 mg/day for adult men and 1.13 mg/day for adult 
women (NNMB urban survey unpublished observations). In a recent study among the healthy urban 
adult population the median intake of vitamin B6 was reported to be 1.2 mg/day for men and 1.0 
mg/day for women6. In rural population, data is not available in Indian scenario.   

 

Vitamin B6 deficiency coprecipitates with other water-soluble vitamins than per se. Clinical 
signs and symptoms of pyridoxine deficiency include peripheral neuritis, epileptic form convulsions, 
anaemia, glossitis, and seborrheic dermatitis eczema, cheilosis, angular stomatitis, hyperirritability, 
convulsive seizures and abnormal electroencephalograms7. Deficiency of vitamin B6 in infants is 
associated as hypochromic microcytic anaemia, failure to thrive, hyperirritability and convulsive 
seizures8. Biochemical as well as clinical (oral lesions) evidence of pyridoxine deficiency has been 
reported in young women of reproductive age in India particularly during pregnancy and in women 

228 
 



 
 

using oral contraceptives9-11. Pregnant women and women using oral contraceptives show increased 
urinary excretion of xanthurenic acid after tryptophan load12,13. More than 5-10 mg pyridoxine is 
needed daily to correct this abnormality, which is believed to be a hormonal effect on the enzyme 
kynureninase. Inadequate vitamin B6 intake has also been reported to impair platelet function and 
clotting mechanisms14,15. Indicators for assessment of vitamin B6 status include direct measurement 
of urinary 4-pyridoxic acid (biologically inactive product of pyridoxine metabolism), blood pyridoxal 
phosphate levels, and indirect functional measurement of in vitro activation of erythrocyte aspartate 
amino transferase (α-EAST) or alanine amino transferase (α-EALT) with pyridoxal phosphate, and 
urinary excretion of xanthurenic acid after oral load of tryptophan. The increase in urinary 
cystathionine after a methionine load is also used as an indicator of vitamin B6 status16. Plasma 
pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) is the best single indicator, because it is believed to reflect tissue stores17. 

 

12.4.2 Previous ICMR recommendations 
 

a. Adults 
 

Pyridoxine requirement is linked to protein content of the diet. Study suggests that pyridoxine 
intake may vary from 1.2-3.3 mg per day18. At an intake of 1.2 mg per day, biochemical evidence of 
4-pyridoxine deficiency as judged by excretion of pyridoxic acid and xanthurenic acid after 
tryptophan load was seen. Similar evidence of biochemical deficiency was not seen in subjects 
consuming 1.9 mg per day. In a controlled depletion-repletion study, it was observed that when 
dietary protein was increased from 30 g to 100 g, pyridoxine requirement increased from 1.25-1.4 mg 
per day18. Based on this, the earlier committee of ICMR recommended 2.0 mg per day, especially 
since cooking losses of the vitamin are negligible. NRC (1989) has recommended 2.0 mg/day for 
adult males and 1.6 mg /day for adult females. This may however be an overestimate, since dietary 
vitamin B6 ratio of 0.02 mg/g protein has been reported to ensure normal biochemical status for most 
parameters19. On the other hand, there is some evidence that availability of pyridoxine from vegetable 
foods may be less than that from animal foods. The former has some amount of pyridoxine in bound 
form as glycoside20. Institute of Medicine (IOM, 1998), has recommended 1.3 mg /day for adult males 
and females21. FAO/WHO in 2004 recommended lower levels of B6 intake for adult male and female 
and other groups22 (Table 12.4.1a). 

b. Pregnancy and lactation 

Pregnant women show biochemical evidence of pyridoxine deficiency, which gets corrected, 
only with high doses of pyridoxine. Earlier ICMR committee had recommended an additional 0.6 
mg/day during pregnancy. FAO/WHO, NRC also recommend the same during pregnancy (Table 
12.4.1a). Breast milk of well-nourished American mothers has been reported to contain 0.1-0.25 mg 
vitamin B6/L. The NRC has recommended additional allowance of 0.5 mg of vitamin B6 per day 
during lactation. ICMR had earlier recommended the same level (Table 12.4.1a), even though vitamin 
B6 content in the breast milk of Indian women has been reported to be much lower23,24. FAO/WHO 
has recommended an intake of 2.2 mg/d and 2.1 mg/day in pregnancy and lactation, respectively 
(Table 12.4.1a). 

c. Infants and children 

Evidence of vitamin B6 deficiency has been reported in infants who consumed less than 0.1 mg 
vitamin B6 through breast milk. The average intake of 0.3 mg was found to protect healthy babies 
against abnormal tryptophan metabolism. Based on this limited information, NRC has recommended 
an intake of 0.3 mg /day for infants aged 0-6 months. This level seems abnormally high when the 
amount of the vitamin available through breast milk is considered. Vitamin B6 content of breast milk 
of American mothers has been reported to be about 0.13 mg/L or 0.1 mg/700 ml. Based on this, 
WHO/FAO recommend 0.1 mg for infants 0-6 months, but a higher level of 0.3 mg for 6-12 months 

229 
 



 
 

infants (Table 12.4.1a). The breast milk vitamin B6 content of Indian mothers was found to be only 
60-80 g/L24. At this level of intake, no evidence of enzymatic vitamin B6 deficiency was detected 
in exclusively breastfed, 1-6 months old infants24. Earlier ICMR committee recommends the retention 
of the earlier value, which is close to the FAO/WHO recommendation for infants (Table 12.4.1a). 

 

Table 12.4.1a: Comparison of ICMR, FAO/WHO and NRC recommendations for vitamin B6 

 
ICMR ICMR FAO/WHO NRC IOM  

Category / Age 1989 2010 2004 1989 2006 
mg/d 

0-6 m 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.1 
Infants 

6-12 m 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.3 
1-3 y 0.9 0.9 0.5 1.0 0.5 

Children 4-6 y 0.9 0.9 0.6 1.1 0.6 
7–9 y 1.6 1.6 1.0 1.2 1.0 

10-12 y 1.6 1.6 1.3 1.7 (11-14 y) 1.0 
Boys 13-15 y 2.0 2.0 1.3 2.0 (15-18 y) 1.3 

16-18 y 2.0 2.0 1.3  1.3 
10-12 y 1.6 1.6 1.2 1.4 (11-14 y) 1.0 

Girls 13-15 y 2.0 2.0 1.2 1.5 (15-18 y) 1.2 
16-18 y 2.0 2.0 1.2  1.2 

2.0 1.3 (19-50 y) 2.0 (19-50 y) 1.3 (19-50 y) 
Men 2.0 

 1.7 (>50 y) (> 50 y) 1.7 (>50 y) 
1.3 (19-50 y) 1.6 (19-50 y) 1.3 (19-50 y) 

Women 2.0 2.0 
1.5 (50+ y) (>50 y) 1.5 (>50 y) 

Pregnant 2.5 2.5 1.9 2.2 1.9 
0-6 m 2.5 2.5 2.0 2.1  

Lactating 
6-12 m 2.5 2.5 2.0 2.1  

 
 

12.4.3. Current recommendations for vitamin B6 
 

12.4.3.1 Estimation of Vitamin B6 requirement based on Plasma PLP [Pyridoxyl-5-phosphate].  
 

Plasma PLP correlates well with tissue stores. PLP concentration of 30 nmol/L is indicative of 
adequate vitamin B6 status (IOM). Estimated average requirement was calculated from the linear 
relationship seen by plotting plasma PLP concentrations and the amount of vitamin B6 intake (data 
obtained from human studies25-30) as given in the figure below. 

 

Figure 12.4.1a: The relationships between plasma PLP and B6 intake in both genders 
 
 
 
 
 
 Men 

Women 
 
 
 

 

 

230 
 



 
 

Assuming a CV of 10% for the distribution of requirements, RDA for vitamin B6 was then 
determined as the 97.5th percentile  of this distribution. 
 

RDA= EAR+2SD where (SD=EAR*CV) 
 Table 12.4.1b: Vitamin B6 requirement 

Based on this approach, the requirement (EAR) to maintain Plasma PLP 
of vitamin B6 for adult men to maintain PLP is 1.0 

EAR 1.0 (mg/day) 
mg/day and for women it was 1.4 mg/day. As an Men 

RDA 1.2 (mg/day) 
alternative approach, measurement of erythrocyte 
aspartate aminotransferase activity coefficient EAR 1.4 (mg/day) 

Women 
(EAST-AC) was done as a functional marker, as it RDA 1.7 (mg/day) 

reflects long term status of vitamin B6 adequacy.    
 

12.4.3.3 Estimation of Vitamin B6 requirement based on functionality [Erythrocyte aspartate 
aminotransferase activity coefficient (EAST-AC)] 
 

The functional activity of erythrocyte aspartate aminotransferase (EAST) which requires PLP 
as a cofactor, was used for estimating the estimated average requirement (EAR), and regression 
analysis was performed by plotting EAST-AC values versus dietary vitamin B6 intake data obtained 
from human studies31-36 for both men and women (Figure 12.4.1b). As the data on EAST-AC was 
very limited, data of both men and women were combined for the regression analysis. For the current 
recommendation EAR of B6 was calculated using EAST-AC cut-off of 1.8 as suggested by EFSA.   
Assuming a CV of 10% for the distribution of requirements, RDA for vitamin B6 was then 
determined.  

Requirement = Constant + slope * Cut-off value of EAST-AC.  
 

RDA= EAR+2SD where (SD=EAR*CV) 
 

 

Figure 12.4.1b: EAST-AC in relation to dietary vitamin B6 intake in both genders 

2.5 y = -1.2425x + 3.7986
R² = 0.297

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9

EAST-AC

 

 

 

231 
 

Dietary Intake (mg/day)



 
 

12.4.3.4 Current recommendations for vitamin B6 across different age groups 

 The dietary intake of B6 was 1.6 mg/day Table 12.4.1c: Recommended vitamin B6 
for an EAST-AC less than 1.8. Considering 1.6 intake in adults (mg/day) based on EAST-AC 
mg as the requirement (EAR) of B6/day, the 
RDA was calculated by considering CV of 10%,  Applied 1.8 as cut-off for 

and RDA of 1.9 mg/day was arrived at for an EAST-AC from EFSA 

adult man. Since the energy requirement for a Men EAR 1.6 
sedentary adult man (ICMR, 2020) is 2110 RDA 1.9 
kcal/day, the vitamin B6 requirement for 1000 Women EAR 1.6 
kcal works out to be 1000 x 1.6/2110 = 0.76 mg RDA 1.9 
(0.76mg B6, EAR/1000 Kcal). The EAR and 
RDA thus derived for adults based on EAST-AC calculation was extrapolated for other physiological 
and age groups based on the energy requirements. Vitamin B6 requirement for different groups based 
on their energy requirement is as follows:  

Table 12.4.1d: Current recommendations for vitamin B6 across different age                             
groups based on EAST-AC 

Age group (Y) EAR (mg/day) RDA (mg/day) 
Infants (0-6m) -  0.1 (AI) 

(6-12m) 0.5  0.6  

Children (1-3 Y) 0.8 0.9 
(4-6 Y) 1.0 1.2 
(7-9 Y) 1.3 1.5 

Boys (10-12 Y) 1.7 2.0 
Girls (10-12 Y) 1.6 1.9 
Boys (13-15 Y) 2.2 2.6 

Girls (13-15 Y) 1.8 2.2 

Boys (16-18 Y) 2.5 3.0 

Girls (16-18 Y) 1.9 2.3 

Adult Men-Sedentary 1.6 1.9 

Moderate 2.1 2.4 

Heavy 2.6 3.1 

Adult Women-Sedentary 1.6 1.9 
Moderate 1.6 1.9 

Heavy 2.1 2.4 
Pregnant 1.9 2.3 

Lactating (0-6m) +0.22 +0.26 
              (6-12m) +0.16 +0.17 

 

12.4.3.6. Tolerable upper limit for vitamin B6 

There is a paucity of data to arrive at upper tolerable limits. However, few studies in India used 
1-10 mg/ day of pyridoxine for 5-15 year boys/ girls and 100 mg/day of pyridoxine for adults. Severe 
toxicity was observed in adults at doses of 500 mg/day38. No adverse effects were observed in 
pregnant women taking up to 200 mg/day of pyridoxine orally and up to 100 mg/day of pyridoxine 
parenterally39-44. Further, the IOM (1998) also states that 100 mg/day of pyridoxine as TUL for adults.  

 

232 
 



 
 

 
 
References 

1. Percudani R, Peracchi A. A genomic overview of pyridoxal‐phosphate‐dependent enzymes. EMBO 
reports. 2003 Sep; 4(9):850-4. 

2. Hsu CC, Cheng CH, Hsu CL, Lee WJ, Huang SC, Huang YC. Role of vitamin B6 status on antioxidant 
defences, glutathione, and related enzyme activities in mice with homocysteine-induced oxidative stress. 
Food & Nutrition Research. 2015 Jan 1; 59(1):25702. 

3.  Longvah T, Ananthan R, Bhaskarachary K, Venkaiah K. In: Longvah T, editor. Indian Food Composition 
Tables: National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad; 2017. 

4. Shibata K, Yasuhara Y, Yasuda K. Effects of cooking methods on the retention of vitamin B6 in foods, 
and the approximate cooking loss in daily meals. Journal of Home Economics of Japan. 2001 Dec 15; 
52(12):1187-97. 

5. Andon MB, Raynolds RD, Moser-Veillon P and Pat Howard M.  Dietary intake of total and glycosylated 
vitamin B6 and the vitamin B6 nutritional status of unsupplemented lactating women and their infants.  
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1989; 50: 1050-8. 

6. Sivaprasad M, Shalini T, Reddy PY, Seshacharyulu M, Madhavi G, Kumar BN, Reddy GB. Prevalence of 
vitamin deficiencies in an apparently healthy urban adult population: Assessed by subclinical status and 
dietary intakes. Nutrition. 2019 Jul 1; 63:106-13. 

7. Sauberlich HE. Vitamin B6 status assessment: past and present. In: Leklem JE and Reynolds RD (ed.). 
Methods in Vitamin B6 Nutrition: Analysis and Status Assessment. Plenum Press, New York, USA. pp. 
203–239. 1981. 

8. Borschel MW. Vitamin B6 in infancy: requirements and current feeding practices. In: Raiten DJ (ed.). 
Vitamin B6 Metabolism in Pregnancy, Lactation and Infancy. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA. pp. 109–
124.1995. 

9. Joshi UM, Virkar KD, Amatayakul K, Singkamani R, Bamji MS, Prema K, Whitehead TP, Belsey MA, 
Hall P, Parker RA. Impact of hormonal contraceptives vis-à-vis non-hormonal factors on the vitamin status 
of malnourished women in India and Thailand. World Health Organization: Special Programme of 
Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction. Task Force on Oral 
Contraceptives. Human nutrition. Clinical nutrition. 1986 May; 40(3):205-20. 

10. Satyanarayana U and Narasinga Rao BS. Effect of dietary protein level on some key enzymes of tryptophan-
NAD pathway. British Journal of Nutrition. 1997; 38: 39. 

11. Ahmed F, Bamji MS and Iyengar L. Effect of oral contraceptive agents on vitamin nutrition status. Am J 
Clinical Nutrition. 1975; 28: 606-15. 

12. Vijayalakshmi R, Bamji MS and Ramalakshmi BA. Reduced anaerobic glycolysis in oral contraceptive 
users. Contraception. 19883; 8: (1)-91-7. 

13. Vijayalakshmi R and Bamji MS. Altered glucose metabolism in female rats treated with sex steroids: reversal 
by excess pyridoxine. Indian Journal of Biochemistry and Biophysics. 1988; 24(6), pp. 329-35. 

14. Brattstrom LE, Israelsson B, Norrving B, Bergkvist D, Thorne J, Hultberg B, Hamfelt A. Impaired 
homocysteine metabolism in early-onset cerebral and peripheral occlusive arterial disease. Effects of 
pyridoxine and folic acid treatment. Atherosclerosis. 1990; 81:51–60. 

15. Subbarao K, Kakkar VV. Thrombin induced surface changes of human platelets. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun. 1979; 88:470–476. 

16. Park YK and Linkswiler H. Effect of vitamin B6 depletion in adult man on the excretion of cystathionine 
and other methionine metabolites. Journal of Nutrition, 100, 110–116. 1970. 

233 
 



 
 

17. Lui A, Lumeng L, Aronoff GR, Li TK. Relationship between body store of vitamin B6 and plasma 
pyridoxal-P clearance: metabolic balance studies in humans. The Journal of laboratory and clinical 
medicine. 1985 Nov 1; 106(5):491-7. 

18. ICMR. Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A Report of the Expert 
Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research. National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 1990. 

19. Hansen CM, Leklem JE and Miller LT. Vitamin B6 status of women with a constant intake of vitamin B6 

changes with three levels of dietary protein. Journal of Nutrition. 1996; 126: 1891. 

20. Van den Berg H. Bioavailability of vitamin D. European journal of clinical nutrition. Supplement. 1997; 
51(1):S76-9. 

21. Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. 
Dietary reference intakes for thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, folate, vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, 
biotin, and choline. National Academies Press (US); 1998. 

22. Joint FAO/WHO. Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. A report of the  joint FAO/WHO 
expert consultation, Bangkok, Thailand, 21-30 September 1998, Second Edition, 2004. 

23. National Research Council. Recommended dietary allowances 10thed. National Academy Press 
Washington DC.  FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Human Vitamin and Mineral Requirements. 1989. 

24. Bamji MS, Premakumari K, Jacob CM. Pyridoxine status and requirement of breast-fed infants: 
relationship with maternal status and milk pyridoxine levels. Nutrition reports international. 1987; 
35(1):171-7. 

25. Young-Nam Kim and Youn-Ok Cho. Evaluation of vitamin B6 intake and status of 20- to 64-year-old 
Koreans. Nutrition Research and Practice. 2014; 8(6):688-694. 

26. Ashima KK, Phylis BM, and Robert DR, Effect of age on changes in plasma, erythrocyte, and urinary. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1988; 48: 1284-90. 

27. Lindberg AS, Leklem JE, Miller LT. The effect of wheat bran on the bioavailability of vitamin B-6 in 
young men. The Journal of nutrition. 1983 Dec 1; 113(12):2578-86. 

28. Daphne LE. Henkvanden Berg, Klaas R. Westerterp. The Influence of Protein Intake on Vitamin B6 
Metabolism Differs in Young and Elderly Humans. American institute of Nutritin.1994. 

29. James EL, Lorraine TM, Anne DP and Diane EP. Bioavailability of Vitamin B6 from Wheat Bread in 
Humans. J. Nutr. 110: 1819-1828, 1980. 

30. Christine M Hansen, James E Lekiem, and Lorraine T Miller. Changes in vitamin B6 status indicators of 
women fed a constant protein diet with varying levels of vitamin B6. Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
1997:66:1379-87. 

31. Planells, CSa´nchez, MA Montellano, J Mataix and J Llopis. Vitamins B6 and B12 and folate status in an 
adult. Mediterranean population. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2003; 57: 777–85. 

32. D. Majchrzak I. Singer M. Männer P. Rust D. Genser K.-H. Wagner Elmadfa. B-Vitamin Status and 
Concentrations of Homocysteine in Austrian Omnivores, Vegetarians and Vegans. Ann Nutrition 
Metabolism. 2006; 50:485–91. 

33. Guilland JC, Bereksi-Reguig B, Lequeu B, Moreau D, Klepping J, Richard D. Evaluation of pyridoxine 
intake and pyridoxine status among aged institutionalised people. International journal for vitamin and 
nutrition research. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Vitamin-und Ernahrungsforschung. Journal international 
de vitaminologie et de nutrition. 1984; 54(2-3):185. 

34. Kretsch MJ, Sauberlich HE, Skala JH, Johnson HL. Vitamin B-6 requirement and status assessment: young 
women fed a depletion diet followed by a plant-or animal-protein diet with graded amounts of vitamin B-
6. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1995 May 1; 61(5):1091-101. 

35. Christine M. Hansen, Terry D. Shultz, Ho-Kyung Kwak, H. Sara Memon and James E. Leklem. 
Assessment of Vitamin B6 Status in Young Women Consuming a Controlled Diet Containing Four Levels 

234 
 



 
 

of Vitamin B6Provides an Estimated Average Requirement and Recommended Dietary Allowance. 
American Society for Nutritional Sciences 2001. 

36. Kant AK, Moser-Veillon PB, Reynolds RD. Effect of age on changes in plasma, erythrocyte, and urinary 
B-6 vitamers after an oral vitamin B-6 load. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1988 Nov 1; 
48(5):1284-90. 

37. European Food Safety Authority. Dietary reference values for Vitamin B6.  EFSA Journal 2016; 
14(6):4485. 

38. Sashi G Kiran, Raj K Dorisetty, Malathi R Umrani, Sesikeran Boindala, Ramesh R, Maniprabha C, Singh 
H, Venkatesan V. Pyridoxal 5 phosphate protects islets against streptozotocin-induced beta-cell 
dysfunction - in vitro and in vivo. Experimental Biology and Medicine. 2011; 236:456-65. 

39. Dalton K, Dalton MJ. Characteristics of pyridoxine overdose neuropathy syndrome. Acta neurologica 
scandinavica. 1987 Jul; 76(1):8-11. 

40. ELLIS J. Treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome with vitamin B6. Southern Medical Journal. 1987 Jul; 
80(7):882-4. 

41. Weinstein BB, Wohl Z, Mitchell GJ, Sustendal GF. Oral administration of pyridoxme hydrochloride in 
the treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Amur. J. Obstet. GynecoL. 1944; 47:389-94. 

42. Dorsey CW. The use of pyridoxine and suprarenal cortex combined in the treatment of the nausea and 
vomiting of pregnancy. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 1949 Dec 1; 58(6):1073-8. 

43. Dorsey CW. The use of pyridoxine and suprarenal cortex combined in the treatment of the nausea and 
vomiting of pregnancy. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 1949 Dec 1; 58(6):1073-8. 

44. Hart BF, McConnell WT. Vitamin B factors in toxic psychosis of pregnancy and the puerperium. 
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. 1943; 46. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

235 
 



 
 

12.5.   FOLATE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Folate is one of the water soluble B-complex vitamins and is the natural form of vitamin B9 
present in food. The primary biochemical function of folate is to transfer single carbon units 
required in the biosynthetic reactions of nucleic acids and amino acids. In addition, adequate folate 
supply is required for rapidly growing and multiplying cells in our body. The folate found in foods 
consists of a mixture of unsubstituted polyglutamyl tetrahydrofolates and various substituted one 
carbon forms of tetrahydrofolate (e.g. 10-formyl-, 5, 10-methylene-, and 5-methyl-tetrahydrofolate). 
Along with vitamin B12, folate is essential for the synthesis of nucleic acids. The other functions 
include methylation of DNA as part of epigenetic regulation. It also ensures supply of methionine 
for synthesis of various proteins. Synthetic form of folate is folic acid which is used in supplements 
and in fortified foods. After supplementation, folic acid is absorbed unchanged and reduced to the 
dihydro and tetrahydro forms in cells in the post-absorptive phase.   
 

12.5.1. Food folate and bioavailability 
 

Folate is present in a wide variety of foods of both plant and animal origin. The rich sources 
of folate in animal foods include marine and fresh water fish and shellfish, chicken liver, beef liver 
and pork liver, whereas the rich plant-based sources of folate are pulses & legumes, green leafy & 
other vegetables and cereals. Pulses usually contain two folds of folate as compared to cereals1. A 
recent study also reported different forms and total folate content in selected traditionally prepared 
foods in Southern India2. Folate is present in the free form or as conjugated form of polyglutamates 
with variable number of glutamate residues. The proportion of free and conjugated folate varies 
from food to food. Before absorption, polyglutamates are broken down by the folate conjugase in 
the intestine. The extent of absorption of dietary folate has not been well studied, while free folic 
acid is well absorbed. Reduced folate derivatives are less bioavailable than oxidized conjugates. 
Though there has been a controversy, it is generally believed that the polyglutamate and 
monoglutamate derivatives of folic acid have similar bioavailability.  
 

The matric, dietary folate equivalent (DFE unit) was introduced to rationalize/express the total 
folate intake from natural food sources as well as folic acid intakes from fortified foods and 
supplements as an integrated measure of both. DFEs are defined as: μg of natural food folate + 1.7 
x μg of synthetic folic acid.  The 1.7 multiplier was arrived based on assumptions that extent of 
bioavailability of added folic acid was 85% and that of food folate bioavailability was only 50%. 
The 85/50 ratio also inferred that the bioavailability of food folate was about 60% relative to added 
folic acid3. The bioavailability of folic acid (both supplements and fortified foods) is virtually 
higher than the net bioavailability of naturally occurring food folate4. 

 

The studies on actual availability of food folates are few in India. Over 70 % of the folates 
from egg, 60-70% from pulses and green leafy vegetables and 50% from vegetables are absorbed5. 
Several dietary factors like fibre are known to affect the availability of folate from foods. Studies 
with radio-labelled synthetic polyglutamates showed that more than 50% of it is in the active 
coenzyme form, irrespective of the chemical form in which it was ingested6. It has been assumed 
that 50% of the folate present in Indian diets is absorbed. A detailed study involving different 
Indian recipes demonstrated that the average loss of folates during cooking is 32% and the folate 
density in Indian meal is about 50 μg/1000 kcal7,8. A recent study gives an exhaustive account on 
bioavailability of dietary folates from South Indian urban diets for the first time, using advanced 
methodology [triple enzyme- LCMS for folate analysis and double stable isotope folate 
bioavailability using 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate (5MTHF) as reference]9. Investigators reported that 
the actual content of folates appears much more than what has been reported so far using 

236 
 



 
 

conventional methods and the mean bioavailability of the diets is around 45%, based on normalized 
red cell folate. There have been other reports too showing higher levels of food folate by refined 
methodology. It was calculated that a value of 429 μg of dietary folate by LCMS methodology (of 
which 188 μg is bioavailable) was found to be 277 μg/d by microbiological method (121 μg, 
bioavailable). It corresponded to only 100-170 μg/d on the basis of conventional food table 
computation. This study emphasizes the need for generating more reliable data on food folates 
(bound and free) and their absorption.  
 
12.5.2. Deficiency 
 

In recent years, both folic acid and vitamin B12 deficiencies were found to be associated with 
elevated blood homocysteine levels, which in turn were reported to be a major etiological risk 
factor of cardiovascular disease. A recent study demonstrated that supplementation of folic acid 
alone or in combination with vitamin B12 to Indian patients with vascular disease had reduced the 
observed elevated homocysteine levels10. Further, chronic and severe forms of folate deficiency 
also lead to abnormal hemopoiesis and megaloblastic anaemia (MBA), which promptly responds to 
treatment with the vitamin. This anaemia remains indistinguishable from the one produced by 
vitamin B12 deficiency. MBA is relatively common in all age groups11. A recent hospital based 
study has reported 3.6% MBA in anaemic subjects and the prevalence of vitamin B12 and folic acid 
deficiencies in these MBA subjects were found to be 40% and 25% respectively, while combined 
deficiency was 35%12. The other studies also reported a very low level of folate and/or Vitamin B12 
and also hyper-homocysteinemia in MBA cases compared to non-megaloblastic anaemia in both the 
genders13,14.  
 

MBA also occurs occasionally in pregnant women particularly from poor income groups. It is 
possible that the widespread iron deficiency (microcytic anaemia) could mask megaloblastic 
anaemia. An earlier study from south India showed biochemical deficiencies of both iron and folic 
acid occurring to the same extent in adult women drawn from a slum, though the proportion of each 
deficiency (45% showed inadequate folate status) may vary with progression of pregnancy15. In a 
previous study, sub-clinical folate deficiency was found to be about 26.3% in pregnant women from 
rural North India16. A different level of sub-clinical folate deficiency was also reported in young 
children17, under five year’s children18, school-age children19, adolescents20, adults and elderly21. 

 

In addition, lack of folate at critical stages of conception was found to be an important cause 
of neural tube defects (NTD) in the neonates. According to the recent review, the overall prevalence 
of NTD in India was around 4.5 per 1000 total births22. However, an earlier multi-centric study had 
observed a very high prevalence of open NTD in India and in this study prenatal folate 
supplementation to mothers with proven record of delivering one such baby supported this 
observation demonstrating a drop in the recurrence rate of NTD (2.92%) in supplemented as 
compared to those receiving placebo control (7.04%) 23. 

 

12.5.3. Dietary intakes in India 
 

Inadequate dietary intake of folate may cause folate deficiency in India. A previous survey 
conducted by National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (2000) had showed low intakes of dietary 
folate in all age groups8. A micronutrient survey in Eastern and North eastern part of the country 
reported that though the mean intakes of folate are comparable to the previous RDA of 100 µg/d (as 
suggested by the previous committee in 1990), yet dietary deficiency of folate was observed in 20-
70% of subjects, thus, the mean values are perhaps masking the extent of dietary deficiency24.  Even 
discounting the effect of skewed distribution of folic acid intakes, there has been a considerable 
biochemical inadequacy of folic acid. In a study done among the middle income school age children 
at NIN, it was found that almost all the children in the age group 6-16 years had low RBC folate 

237 
 



 
 

though their diet contained a mean intake of 155% RDA for folic acid25. It is obvious that either 
there were losses in cooking that were not accounted for or the RDA of 100 µg is just not adequate. 
Losses during cooking were not found to be high, leaving the low RDA as a possible reason.  
 

Further, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau survey (2012)26 in 10 states of rural 
populations shows that the median intake of folate is less than the recommended RDA of 2010 in all 
age groups27. Only about 32-41% of adults meet ≥70% RDA and about 39-46% were consuming 
less than 50% of the recommended folate RDA of 200 µg/day for adults. A recent secondary 
analysis of the NNMB 2012 dataset reported a high risk of dietary inadequacy for folate among 
adolescents (10-19y) and adult women of reproductive age (20-49y), assessed based on estimated 
average requirement (EARs) suggested by the World Health Organization (2004)28. A subsequent 
survey in urban population has shown that about 69-79% of adults intake of total folate was ≥70% 
RDA and about 13-18% consumed ≤50% of RDA29. 
 

12.5.4. Dietary folate intakes and status in Adults 
 

A recent cross sectional study reported the prevalence of folate deficiency at 4.4% and 9.5% 
based on plasma folate cut-off of <3 ng/ml among 20-40 year and 41-60 year old healthy urban 
adults, respectively. The corresponding median dietary folate intake was 154 μg/day and 162 
μg/day in these two age groups respectively. However the cut-off level considered for deficiency is 
only <3 ng/ml which is lower than the WHO cut-off of <4 ng/ml. Also the intake in this study was 
below the current recommended RDA of 200 μg/day21. Another study carried out by the same 
group, consider the cut-off of plasma folate <10 nmol/L or <4ng/ml (suggested by the WHO), the 
prevalence of folate deficiency was 32% & 29% among 20-40 and 41-60 years of age groups 
respectively, while the median dietary folate intake in these two age groups was same as 152 μg/day 
and 162 μg/day, respectively30.  

 

A study carried out by Naik et al among young adult vegetarians has reported that there was 
no folate deficiency, considering a lower cut-off of <2.0 ng/ml and the median intake of folate was 
268 and 275 μg/day among male and female study participants respectively31. Another study by the 
same group again showed no folate deficiency among young vegetarian Indian adult, whereas the 
median dietary intake of dietary folate was 355 μg/day32. Based on the above studies21,30-32, if we 
take into consideration the WHO cut off of plasma folate of 4 ng/ml (10 nmol/l), intake of dietary 
folate of 200 µg/day may be insufficient and may result in folate deficiency.  
 

12.5.5. RDA for adults: Previous ICMR recommendations 
 

The reference values set for the folate vary from country to country and most of these values 
were arrived mainly from controlled metabolic studies, where in their primary indicator is Red 
blood cell (RBC) folate as it reflects tissue folate stores and secondary indicators are serum/plasma 
folate (reflects recent folate intakes) and total homocysteine (functional indicator). This requirement 
estimate was mainly based on the amount of folate essential to maintain normal levels of red cell 
folate. 

 

In India, based on the earlier studies showing that an intake of 75 μg /d folic acid may ensure 
adequate blood folate levels, the previous ICMR Committee in 1990 made a recommendation of 
100 μg folic acid per day for adult man and women33. Another study revealed that daily intakes 
ranging between 200-250 μg are necessary to maintain satisfactory status. These studies had dose-
response relationship built into them34. A recent review among adults and elderly revealed that for 
every doubling in intake of folate, the changes in RBC folate, plasma/serum folate and plasma 
homocysteine levels were increased by 21%, 22%, and decreased by 16% respectively35. Earlier 
studies reported that about 32% of the dietary folate is lost in Indian style of cooking7 and around 

238 
 



 
 

45-50% of the folate is absorbed. It is reasonable to assume that the bioavailable folate is about 1/3 
of the total folate in Indian foods/diets and the advisable physiological requirement of folic acid (75 
μg) can be obtained from 200 μg of dietary folate.  
 

Considering the earlier recommendation of 100 μg/day33 along with the recommendations of 
200 μg/day suggested by International Union of Nutritional Sciences (1983) and 400 μg by Food 
and Nutrition Board of the USA (1974), the previous committee constituted in 2010 made a 
recommendation of 200 μg dietary folate per day for adult men and women27. In view of the proven 
role of folic acid deficiency as an etiological factor for elevated blood homocysteine and CVD, and 
congenital NTD, there is a concern for upward revision of RDA for folic acid. There have been 
suggestions to increase intake of folate to at least 400 μg per day to prevent chronic disease, 
particularly cancer and CVD36. However, considering the intake and the prevalence of sub-clinical 
deficiency, a level of intake that was found essential in previous studies, i.e; 200 µg/d is 
recommended as the intake of dietary folate for adult males and females27. 
 

12.5.6. Revision of RDA for adults 
 

 Since there is lack of data with respect to dietary folate intake and RBC folate status among 
Indian adult subjects, we have considered plasma folate as primary indicator and analysed pooled 
data of three cross sectional studies published from NIN 21, 30, 37 to find out the dietary folate that is 
required to maintain plasma folate (>10nmol/L) and homocysteine at normal levels among adults 
(21 to <50 years).  

 

Based on the descriptive statistics, the amount of folate (median intake) required to maintain 
normal plasma folate for the male subjects was ~250 µg/day and for female it was ~180 µg/day. 
Considering both the genders together, the median intake was 220 µg/day and the 95th centile was 
260 µg/day (Table 12.5.1). The range of intake of dietary folate in this category was from 124 
µg/day to 657 µg/day in both the genders. 
 

Table 12.5.1: Median and mean dietary folate intake of adults (based on the dietary folate 
required to maintain normal plasma folate levels) 

 

Median (P25-P75) 
Mean (SD) dietary Median 

Group dietary folate intake 
folate intake (µg/day) +10%CV 

(µg/day) 
Men (n=17) 250 (211-278) 285 (150) 300 
Women (n=27) 180 (152-269) 233 (131) 220 
Both the genders 

214 (171-273) 253 (140) 260 
(n=44) 

 
P25: 25th percentile, P75: 75th percentile.  
SD: Standard Deviation. 
 

Similarly, the amount of dietary folate required to maintain plasma homocysteine at normal 
levels (<15 µmol/L), for male subjects was median of ~424 µg/day and for females it was found to 
be ≈200 µg/day. When analysed for both genders together, the median intake was ~220 µg/day and 
the 95th centile was 260 µg/day (Table 12.5.2). The intake of dietary folate in this category ranged 
from 117 µg/day to 687 µg/day in both the genders. 
 
 

 
 

239 
 



 
 

Table 12.5.2: Median and mean dietary folate intake of adults (based on the dietary         
folate required to maintain normal plasma homocysteine levels) 

 

Median (P25-P75) Mean (SD) dietary 
Median 

Group dietary folate intake folate intake 
+10%CV 

(µg/day) (µg/day) 

Men (n=4) 424 (321-573) 447 (164) 508 
Women (n=18) 200 (177-229) 221 (82) 240 
Both the genders 

217 (192-319) 262 (131) 260 
(n=22) 

 

P25: 25th percentile, P75: 75th percentile.  
SD: Standard Deviation 

 

Further, the amount of dietary folate required to maintain both plasma folate and 
homocysteine at normal levels was also analysed and the median intake of folate for females was 
found to be ~205 µg/day. As for males, only one male subject had normal plasma folate and 
homocysteine level (Table 12.5.3). When analysed for both genders together, the median intake was 
~217 µg/day and the 95th centile was 260 µg/day (Table 12.5.3). The intake of dietary folate in this 
category ranged from 124 µg/day to 657 µg/day in both the genders. 
 

Table 12.5.3: Median and mean dietary folate intake of adults (based on the dietary         
folate required to maintain normal plasma folate and homocysteine levels) 

 

Median (P25-P75) Mean (SD) dietary Median 
Group dietary folate intake folate intake +10%CV 

(µg/day) (µg/day)  
Men (n=1) 657 657 --- 
Women(n=12) 205 (162-274) 231 (114) 245 
Both the 

217 (177-319) 264 (132) 260 
genders(n=13) 

 
P25: 25th percentile, P75: 75th percentile.  
SD: Standard Deviation 

 

Based on the data shown in Table 12.5.1 to 12.5.3 and also the number of subjects and 
variations in the mean/median data, we have considered dietary folate required for maintaining 
normal folate levels (Table 12.5.1) for calculating the RDA. The amount of folate (median intake) 
required to maintain normal plasma folate levels for male subjects was ~250 µg/day (EAR) and 
considering CV as 10%, the RDA (EAR+2SD) was arrived at 300 µg/day, while for female, the 
EAR was ~180 µg/day and the RDA was arrived at 216 (220) µg/day (Table 12.5.4). 

 

The EAR and RDA values for children and adolescence have been extrapolated from the adult 
values based on growth factors and body weights as described earlier in IOM, 19983. While 
calculating RDA for pregnant women, the gestational weight (~12 kgs) was added. The present 
committee has agreed with the previous committee27 over the conceptual basis on which additional 
requirements of 300 µg/day and 100 µg/day were added respectively during pregnancy and 
lactation for meeting the factorial extra needs. While for infants (0-6 months), the previous 
committee27 recommended values were retained, and for 6-12 months age EAR and RDA was 
calculated based on the adult values (Table 12.5.4).   

 
 

240 
 



 
 

Table 12.5.4: RDA of dietary folate for various physiological groups 
 

EAR RDA 2020 
Group Category/Age Body weights (kg) TUL (µg) 

Dietary folate (µg/d*) 
Sedentary 65.0 

Men Moderate 65.0 250 300 1000 
Heavy 65.0 
Sedentary 55.0 
Moderate 55.0 180 220 1000 
Heavy 55.0 

Women 
Pregnant 55.0  480 570 1000 
Lactating 0-6 m 280 330 

55.0 1000 
               6-12 m 280 330 
0-6 m 5.8 --- 25 (AI)  

Infants 
6-12 m 8.5 71 (AI) 85 (AI)  
1-3 y 11.7 90 110 

6-9 y 
Children 4-6 y 18.3 111 135 

300 
7-9 y 25.3 142 170 

Boys 10-12 y 34.9 180 220 
Girls 10-12 y 36.4 186 225 
Boys 13-15 y 50.5 238 285 9-17 y 
Girls 13-15 y 49.6 204 245 600-800 
Boys 16-18 y 64.4 286 340 
Girls 16-18 y 55.7 223 270 

*1 µg of food/dietary folate = 0.5 µg of synthetic folic acid taken on empty stomach or 0.6 µg folic acid 
taken with meals. 
AI: Adequate intake 
 
12.5.7. Tolerable upper limit for folate 
 

According to the IOM, 19983, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, the tolerable 
Upper Limits (TUL) for folate is 300 µg/day for 6-9 years; 600-800 µg/day for 9-17 years; While a 
few studies in India used 500 µg/day involving adolescent boys and girls; 5 mg for urban healthy 
pregnant women of 17-40 years of age; 10 mg or 30 mg/week by rheumatoid arthritis patients (18-
75 yrs.) with no adverse effects. However, high maternal folate intakes coupled with low B12 
intakes were associated with a higher risk of delivering a small-for-gestational age infant. The 
deleterious effect of high folate intakes with low B12 intakes needs to be explored further. 

 
  

241 
 



 
 

References 
 

1. Longvah T, Ananthan R, Bhaskarachary K, Venkaiah K. In: Longvah T, editor. Indian Food 
Composition Tables: ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad; 2017. 

2. Vishnumohan S, Pickford R, Arcot J. Naturally occurring folates in selected traditionally prepared foods 
in Southern India. Journal of food science and technology. 2017 Dec 1; 54(13):4173-80. 

3. Institute of Medicine (US). Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamine, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, 
Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 
1998. 

4. Wright AJ, King MJ, Wolfe CA, Powers HJ, Finglas PM. Comparison of (6 S)-5-methyltetrahydrofolic 
acid v. folic acid as the reference folate in longer-term human dietary intervention studies assessing the 
relative bioavailability of natural food folates: comparative changes in folate status following a 16-week 
placebo-controlled study in healthy adults. British Journal of Nutrition. 2010; 103(5):724-9. 

5. Babu S, Srikantia SG. Availability of folates from some foods. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
1976; 29(4):376-9. 

6. Godwin HA, Rosenber. IH. Absorption of synthetic cold and tritium-labeled pteroylheptaglutamic acid. 
In Journal of clinical investigation 1970 Jan 1 (vol. 49, no. 6, p. A35):Rockefeller Univ Press. 

7. Agte V, Tarwadi K, Mengale S, Hinge A, Chiplonkar S. Vitamin profile of cooked foods: how healthy is 
the practice of ready-to-eat foods?. International journal of food sciences and nutrition. 2002 Jan 1; 
53(3):197-208. 

8. NNMB Special Report, Report on Food and Nutrient intake of Individuals, Report No 20:  pp 67-95, 
Hyderabad, NIN. 2000. 

9. Vishnumohan S. Natural folates - Method development, analysis and bioavailability of the most 
predominant 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate in mixed diets in humans.  A Thesis Submitted to the School of 
Chemical Sciences and Engineering for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy, The University of New 
South Wales, 2008. 

10. Bhargava S, Ali A, Bhargava EK, Manocha A, Kankra M, Das S, Srivastava LM. Lowering 
homocysteine and modifying nutritional status with folic acid and vitamin B12 in Indian patients of 
vascular disease. Journal of clinical biochemistry and nutrition. 2011:1202080140-. 

11. Khanduri U, Sharma A. Megaloblastic anaemia: prevalence and causative factors. National Medical 
Journal of India. 2007; 20(4):172-5. 

12. Kaur N, Nair V, Sharma S, Dudeja P, Puri P. A descriptive study of clinico-hematological profile of 
megaloblastic anemia in a tertiary care hospital. Medical journal armed forces India. 2018 Oct 1; 
74(4):365-70. 

13. Yadav MK, Manoli NM, Madhunapantula SV. Comparative Assessment of Vitamin-B12, Folic Acid and 
Homocysteine Levels in Relation to p53 Expression in Megaloblastic Anemia. PLoS One 2016; 
11(10):e0164559. 

14. Yadav MK, Manoli NM, Vimalraj S, Madhunapantula SV. Unmethylated promoter DNA correlates with 
p53 expression and apoptotic levels only in Vitamin B9 and B12 deficient megaloblasticanemia but not in 
non-megaloblasticanemia controls. International Journal Biomedical Macromolecules. 2018; 109:76-84.  

15. Raman L, Subbalaxmi PV, Vasumathi N, Rawal A, Vasanthi G, Parvathi CH, Adinarayana K, Pawashe 
AB, Rao KV. Iron and folic acid nutritional status of women in slum. Nutrition reports international 
(USA). 1989. 

16. Pathak P, Kapil U, Kapoor S, et al. Prevalence of multiple micronutrient deficiencies amongst pregnant 
women in rural area of Haryana. Indian Pediatrics. 2004; 71:1007-1014. 

17. Houghton LA, Trilok-Kumar G, McIntosh D, Haszard JJ, Harper MJ, Reid M, Erhardt J, Bailey K, 
Gibson RS. Multiple micronutrient status and predictors of anemia in young children aged 12-23 months 
living in New Delhi, India. PLoS One. 2019; 14(2):e0209564. 

18. Kapil U, Toteja GS, Bhadoria AS. Cobalamin and folate deficiencies among children in the age group of 
12-59 months in India. Biomed J. 2015 Mar 1; 38(2):162-6. 

242 
 



 
 

19. Kapil U, Toteja GS, Bhadoria AS. Cobalamin and folate deficiencies among children in the age group of 
12-59 months in India. Biomed J. 2015 Mar 1; 38(2):162-6. 

20. Jani R, Salian N, Udipi S, Ghugre P, Lohia N, Haas J, Boy E. Folate status and intake of tribal Indian 
adolescents aged 10 to 17 years. Food and nutrition bulletin. 2015 Mar; 36(1):14-23. 

21. Sivaprasad M, Shalini T, Balakrishna N, Sudarshan M, Lopamudra P, Suryanarayana P, et al. Status of 
Vitamin B12 and folate among the urban adult population in South India. Annals of Nutrition 
Metabolism. 2016; 68:94-102. 

22. Allagh KP, Shamanna BR, Murthy GV, Ness AR, Doyle P, Neogi SB, Pant HB; Wellcome Trust- PHFI 
Folic Acid project team. Birth prevalence of neural tube defects and or ofacial clefts in India: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 10(3):e0118961, 2015. 

23. ICMR Central Technical Co-ordinating Unit. Multicentric study of efficacy of peri-conceptional folic 
acid containing vitamin supplementation in prevention of open neural tube defects from India. Indian 
Journal of Medical Research. 2000; 112:206-11. 

24. Chakravarty I and Sinha RK. Prevalence of micronutrient deficiency based on results obtained from the 
National Pilot Program on Control of Micronutrient Malnutrition. Nutrition Reviews. 2002; 60: (II) S53-
S58.  

25. Sivakumar B, Nair KM, Sreeramulu D, et al. Effect of micronutrient supplement on health and nutrition 
status of school children: biochemical status. Nutrition. 2006; 22: Suppl No1, 15-25. 

26. NNMB. Diet and nutritional status of rural population. Prevalence of hypertension and diabetes among 
adults and infants and young child feeding practices. -Report of the third survey NNMB Technical 
Report No.26. National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad. 2012. 

27. ICMR. Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A report of the expert 
group of the Indian Council of Medical Research National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad; 2010. 

28. Radhika MS, Swetha B, Kumar BN, Krishna NB, Laxmaiah A. Dietary and non-dietary determinants of 
nutritional status among adolescent girls and adult women in India. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences. 2018 Mar; 1416(1):5-17. 

29. NNMB. Diet and nutritional status of urban population in India and prevalence of obesity, hypertension, 
diabetes and hyperlipidemia in urban men and women. National Nutritional Monitoring Bureau brief 
report on urban nutrition. Technical Report No.27. National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad. 2017. 

30. Shalini T, Sivaprasad M, Balakrishna N, Madhavi G, Radhika MS, Kumar BN, Pullakhandam R, Reddy 
GB. Micronutrient intakes and status assessed by probability approach among the urban adult population 
of Hyderabad city in South India. European journal of nutrition. 2019 Dec 1; 58(8):3147-59. 

31. Naik S, Mahalle N, Bhide V. Identification of vitamin B 12 deficiency in vegetarian Indians. British 
Journal of Nutrition. 2018 Mar; 119(6):629-35. 

32.  Naik S, Bhide V, Babhulkar A, Mahalle N, Parab S, Thakre R, Kulkarni M. Daily milk intake improves 
vitamin B-12 status in young vegetarian Indians: an intervention trial. Nutrition journal. 2013 Dec 1; 
12(1):136. 

33. ICMR. Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary Allowances for Indians. A Report of the 
Expert Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 
1990. 

34. Babu S. Studies on folic acid. PhD Thesis. 1976. Osmania University, Hyderabad, India. 

35. Novaković R, Geelen A, Ristić-Medić D, Nikolić M, Souverein OW, McNulty H, Duffy M, Hoey L, 
Dullemeijer C, Renkema JM, Gurinović M. Systematic review of observational studies with dose-
response meta-analysis between folate intake and status biomarkers in adults and the elderly. Annals of 
Nutrition and Metabolism. 2018; 73(1):30-43. 

36. Krishnaswamy K, Nair KM. Importance of folate in human nutrition. British Journal of Nutrition. 2001 
May; 85(S2):S115-24. 

37. Sivaprasad M, Shalini T, Reddy PY, Seshacharyulu M, Madhavi G, Kumar BN, Reddy GB. Prevalence 
of vitamin deficiencies in an apparently healthy urban adult population: Assessed by subclinical status 
and dietary intakes. Nutrition. 2019; 63-64:106-13. 

243 
 



 
 

12.6   VITAMIN B12 

INTRODUCTION 

 Vitamin B12 is a water-soluble micronutrient and is important in the diet as it is required for 
formation of genetic materials in the cells and helps to keep the body’s nerve and blood cells healthy. 
It is a key nutrient associated with one carbon metabolic pathways related to substrate metabolism. 
The major source for vitamin B12 (henceforth B12) is animal source foods like milk and other dairy 
products, fish, poultry and meat1. The deficiency of B12 is characterized by pernicious anaemia, 
weakness, fatigue, loss of appetite, constipation, and weight loss2,3. The neurological symptoms of 
B12 deficiency include depression, confusion, cognitive decline, dementia, failure to thrive and 
developmental delays4. Adequate intake of the nutrient ensures optimal functioning of the body.  

12.6.1  Vitamin B12 intake and deficiency in India 

 Based on analyses of household food expenditure from the 68th round of National Sample 
Survey Organization (NSSO), the average adult Indian population consumed 1.13 µg B12/d

5. The 
consumption was high in the states which consumed more fish. These were estimates of intake based 
on consumer units of household intake, and biomarker based evaluations of B12 status are better 
indicators. The more recent Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS) 2019 survey of 
children and adolescents in India showed that there was a relatively low prevalence of biomarker 
based B12 deficiency in all age groups of children6.  The prevalence of deficiency (based on serum 
B12 concentration) was 13.8%, 17.2% and 30.9% in 1-4, 5-9 and 10-19y, respectively. Corroborating 
this, a study conducted on adults from Tamil Nadu found that only 19.9% were deficient based on 
total serum homocysteine concentration (tHcy)7. Another study in Hyderabad showed that 34% 
females and 42% males were deficient based on tHcy8. It is important to note that the prevalence of 
B12 deficiency measured in these studies can vary because it is based on the type of biomarker used 
and there is no consensus regarding the cut-off used for defining the deficiency.  

12.6.2  Previous ICMR recommendations 

 The B12 requirement provided by ICMR expert committee of 1989 was retained by ICMR 2010 
expert committee9,10. The 1989 requirement was based on daily B12 loss from the body, which was 
estimated from studies conducted on Western populations using radioactive labelled B12 isotope to 
measure the loss by whole body counting.  The reported loss daily from the body was 0.1%. Since 
the liver store contains 1 mg of B12, therefore, 1 µg/d (0.1% of 1 mg B12 store) was required to 
replenish the amount lost from the body. However, absorption was considered to be 100%. Another 
approach based on B12 turnover studies which reported that the losses can be between 0.5 – 1.0 µg/d 
was also used to derive the daily requirement.  

 Eventually, the daily B12 requirement was estimated after correcting for cooking losses and 
bioavailability. However, there was no clarity on the exact amount lost during cooking. There was 
also uncertainty regarding the bioavailability or absorption of B12. The variability or distribution of 
daily losses and absorption was not considered while deriving the requirement, and thus, it was not 
clear that if the stated requirement was an Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) or Recommended 
Dietary Allowance (RDA). 

12.6.3  Factorial approach for estimating vitamin B12 requirement 

 The requirement for B12 can be defined using a factorial approach where daily loss of B12 from 
the body stores are estimated after which, the amount required to replace the daily loss is adjusted for 
bioavailability of B12 from the usual diet. Studies conducted on Western populations have measured 

244 
 



 
 

the daily rate of B12 loss in humans using radioactive labelled B12. The loss was measured as the mean 
decay in radioactivity after distribution of administered labelled B12 throughout the body, in both 
healthy subjects and subjects with low serum B12 concentrations, as well as those with pernicious 
anemia. From these studies, the daily B12 loss, expressed as a percentage of total body stores, was 
0.14% (Table 12.6.1).  

Table 12.6.1: Studies reporting daily B12 losses using radioactive labelled vitamin B12 

measured through whole body counting method11-14 
 

Rate of loss (% loss/day) 
Author and year n Health status, age, n 

Mean Range %CV 
Healthy, 25-41 y, n=3 
Patients without pernicious 

Bozian et al, 1963 16 anemia, 40-65 y, n=2 and 0.14 0.09 – 0.15 27 
with pernicious anemia, 57-
85 y, n=11 
Healthy, n=3 

Heyssel et al, 
14 Patients with pernicious 0.13 0.09 – 0.17 15 

1966 
anemia, n=11 
Healthy, 42 y, n=1 

Boddy and 
14 Low vitamin B12, 34-74 y, 0.13 0.09 – 0.19 21 

Adams, 1968 
n=13 

Adams and 
6 Healthy, n=6 0.17 0.15 – 0.20 10 

Boddy, 1968 
 
The total body stores have also been studied in Western populations, using a tracer dose of 

radioactive B12, and showed an average body B12 store of 2629 µg (Table 12.6.2).  
 

Table 12.6.2: Total body stores of B12 reported in literature15-18 

 

Author and Total store (µg) 
n Subjects Method of measurement 

year Mean Range 
Sum of B12 content in liver, 

Grasbeck  
4 Autopsies spleen, kidneys, heart, brain, 3900 790 – 11100 

et al, 1958 
muscles 

Reizenstein  Radioactivity measured using 
3 Healthy 3030 - 

et al, 1966 whole body counting 

Radioactivity and B12 content 
Adams et al, Patients for 

18 of liver biopsy after dosing 2528 960 – 5984 
1970 surgery 

with radioactive labelled B12 

Clearance of radioactive B12 
Bessent et al, from serum and whole body 

4 Controls 1060 780 - 1350 
1980 was used to estimate total 

body content of B12 
 

Using the reported values of daily percentage loss of B12 from the reported total body store, the 
average daily loss is estimated be 3.7 µg/d. Next, a bioavailability factor should be applied to the 
intake required to replace this loss, to provide the EAR. Further, the coefficient of variation (CV%) 
of daily loss and bioavailability should be used to provide the RDA.  

 

245 
 



 
 

In an alternative to the factorial approach, Institute of Medicine (IOM)2, 1998 estimated the 
requirement based on a dose-response approach, where the amount of B12 required to maintain an 
adequate hematological status (stable Hb, normal mean cell volume, normal reticulocyte response 
and serum B12 levels) in persons with pernicious anemia was considered. The EAR was obtained 
from the estimated amount of B12 required for adequate hematological status, which was then adjusted 
for a bioavailability of 50%, which is a conservative value obtained from dairy foods and most forms 
of meat and fish. Assuming a CV of 10% for the distribution of requirements, the RDA for B12 was 
then determined as the 97.5th CI of this distribution. The recommendation based on this approach is 
still under development and there is still no strong consensus on the appropriate B12 cut-off levels in 
the blood to determine adequate status. Additionally, the serum B12 biomarker which was used by 
IOM for estimating requirement, assesses the total circulating B12 and ~80% of this is bound to 
haptocorrin and not available for cellular uptake. Therefore, measuring serum B12 status will be 
unreliable to reflect cellular B12 status and the functional deficiency of B12 cannot be assessed using 
serum B12 alone. Therefore, a factorial approach serves as an alternative and reliable approach to 
estimate the requirements for B12.  
 

12.6.3 – Current recommendations for vitamin B12 
 

Given data available, the factorial approach, where daily loss of B12 from the body stores is 
estimated and then adjusted for bioavailability of B12 from usual diet. However, there are no studies 
which measured losses of B12 from the body among Indians. Recently, a stable isotope labelled B12 

kinetics approach has been conducted at St. John’s Research Institute, Bengaluru.  In this approach, 
12 fasted healthy adult subjects were administered a dose of 2.5 µg of 13C-labelled B12 

(cyanocobalamin) to estimate its kinetics over 9 hours19. 
 

The principal labelled B12 moiety that appeared in the plasma was 13C-methycobalamin 
(meaning very efficient decyanation of cyanocobalamin), measured by a high-resolution analytical 
platform consisting Vanquish Flex Binary UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive (LC-HRAM-MS, Thermo 
Scientific). Kinetic modelling of the plasma enrichment curve, using a two-compartment (central 
extracellular fluid and storage) model was performed to estimate the absorption and clearance 
(excretion) terms. The mean estimated bioavailability was 46% (SD+12%). Using the mean daily 
excretion used in the previous ICMR 2010 recommendation, of 0.1% of a 1 mg store, or a daily 
excretion of 1 µg/d, and adjusting for rounded off mean bioavailability of 50% at intakes of B12 that 
are close to 1 µg/d, would provide an EAR of 2 µg/d for adults. The CV of absorption was ~20%, 
and this value was used to calculate the 97.5th percentile of the distribution of requirement, to define 
a RDA of 2.5 µg/d. The same value is proposed for school children and adolescents. For infants and 
pre-school children, this value should be reduced in relation to body size, since there are no data 
available on the requirement. A conservative EAR value of 1 µg/day based on a lower daily excretion, 
and RDA of 1.2 µg/day is suggested here until specific requirement data are available. This value is 
also consonant with the low levels (14%) of vitamin B12 deficiency observed in 1-4y old children in 
the Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS)20.  For school children and adolescents, there 
are also no data describing the daily B12 loss and since no TUL is established (see section 12.6.4), the 
adult requirement is suggested for these age groups. (Table 12.6.3). 

  
During pregnancy, studies have shown that the human foetus accumulates 0.1 µg B12/d. These 

estimates were based on liver content of B12 of infants born to mother with adequate B12 status. The 
livers of still born foetuses at different gestational age were also studied for their B12 content, and in 
vitamin B12 deficient mothers, fetal liver stores greatly reduced21. Studies have shown that as the 
foetal age increased the accumulation of B12 also increased reaching a maximum amount of 20-25 µg 
B 22

12 . In another study, the liver of still births and neonates that died within 72 hrs of delivery were 
studied for their B12 content and this study showed that a foetus with normal weight had a liver B12 

246 
 



 
 

content of 19.4-31.3 µg23. In another study, B12 and folate content of foetuses showed that at term, 
the content was 27.3 µg B 24

12 . Based on these studies, and a simple division of accumulated B12 by 
the number of days of pregnancy, it is suggested that an additional mean requirement of 0.1 µg B12/d 
for adequate foetal growth, and when adjusted for 50% absorption, is 0.2 µg/d. When adjusted for an 
assumed variability of 10%, this yields an additional pregnancy RDA of 0.25 µg/d. 
  

During lactation, the additional B12 requirement was based on the B12 content of milk. On 
average, breast milk contains 0.6-0.7 µg B12/L and the breastmilk output in Indian women is 700 ml/d 
in first 6 months25. Therefore, the additional loss of B12 to the body during lactation is about 0.4 µg/d, 
and the requirement during lactation, adjusted for 50% absorption, is 0.8 µg/d. When adjusted for an 
assumed variability of 10%, this yields an additional pregnancy RDA of 1.0 µg/d. 

 

12.6.4 – Tolerable Upper Limit for vitamin B12 
 

There is limited evidence to suggest a level at which adverse events can be observed. In the 
Norwegian Vitamin (NORVIT) intervention trial, patients with acute myocardial infarction received 
400 µg of B12 daily for 3 years and reported no serious adverse events26. In another study (HOPE 2), 
patients with vascular disease or diabetes aged  >55 y received 1 mg B12 daily for 5 years and reported 
no serious adverse event with this treatment27. Additionally, the IOM (1998) also states that there is 
no adverse effect associated with excess B12 intake from foods or supplements in healthy individuals2. 
This could be due to limited absorption from gastrointestinal tract with high doses, and therefore, 
IOM did not establish an upper limit for B12. The evidence from the limited data is not sufficient for 
deriving Tolerable Upper Limit (TUL). Further, the Indian population mostly consume vegetarian 
diets which do not provide B12, except milk and its product. Therefore, high intakes of B12 from foods 
are unlikely.  
 

Table 12.6.3: Current recommendations for vitamin B12 across age groups 
 

EAR RDA  
Age group (y) 

(µg/d) (µg/d) 

Infants (0-6 m) - Breast milk 

Infants and pre-school children (6 m - 5 y) 1.0 1.2 

School children and adolescents (5-17 y) 2.0 2.5 

Adults 2.0 2.5 
Pregnant (Additional) 0.20 0.25 
Lactating (Additional) 0.8 1.0 

  

247 
 



 
 

References 

1. Watanabe F. Vitamin B12 sources and bioavailability. Experimental biology and medicine. 2007 Nov; 
232(10):1266-74. 

2. Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. 
Dietary reference intakes for thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, folate, vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, 
biotin, and choline. National Academies Press (US); 1998. 

3. Healton EB, Savage DG, Brust JC, Garrett TF, Lindenbaum J. Neurological aspects of cobalamin 
deficiency. Medicine 1991; 70:229-44. 

4. Bottiglieri T. Folate, vitamin B12, and neuropsychiatric disorders. Nutrition Reviews. 1996; 54:382-90. 

5. National Sample Survey Office. Nutritional Intake in India, 2011-12. 560, NSS 68th Round. National 
Statistical Organization. Government of India. 2014. 

6. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Government of India, UNICEF and Population 
Council. Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS) National Report. New Delhi, 2019. 

7. Jayashri R, Venkatesan U, Rohan M, Gokulakrishnan K, Rani CS, Deepa M, Anjana RM, Mohan V, 
Pradeepa R. Prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency in South Indians with different grades of glucose 
tolerance. Acta Diabetol. 2018; 55(12):1283-93. 

8. Sivaprasad M, Shalini T, Reddy PY, Seshacharyulu M, Madhavi G, Kumar BN, Reddy GB. Prevalence of 
vitamin deficiencies in an apparently healthy urban adult population: Assessed by subclinical status and 
dietary intakes. Nutrition. 2019 Jul 1; 63:106-13. 

9. Indian Council of Medical Research: Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary Allowances for 
Indians. A Report of the Expert Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research, ICMR, New Delhi, 
1989. 

10. ICMR. Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A report of the expert 
group of the Indian Council of Medical Research National Institute of Nutrition Hyderabad; 2010. 

11. Bozian RC, Ferguson JL, Heyssel RM, Meneely GR, Darby WJ. Evidence concerning the human 
requirement for vitamin B12. Use of the whole body counter for determination of absorption of vitamin 
B12. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1963; 12: 117–129. 

12. Heyssel RM, Bozian RC, Darby WJ, Bell MC. Vitamin B12 turnover in man. The assimilation of vitamin 
B12 from natural foodstuff by man and estimates of minimal daily dietary requirements. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition. 1966; 18: 176-184. 

13. Boddy K, Adams JF. Excretion of cobalamins and coenzyme B12 following massive parenteral doses. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1968; 21: 657–664 

14. Adams JF, Boddy K. Metabolic equilibrium of tracer and natural vitamin B12. The Journal of laboratory 
and clinical medicine. 1968 Sep 1; 72(3):392-6. 

15. Grasbeck R, Nyberg W, Reizenstein P. Biliary and Fecal Vit. B12 Excretion in Man. An Isotope Study. 
Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine. 1958 Apr; 97(4):780-4. 

16. Reizenstein P, Ek G, Matthews CM. Vitamin B12 kinetics in man. Implications on total-body-B12-
determinations, human requirements, and normal and pathological cellular B12 uptake. Physics in 
Medicine & Biology. 1966 Apr; 11(2):295. 

17. Adams JF, Tankel HI, MacEwan F. Estimation of the total body vitamin B12 in the live subject. Clinical 
science. 1970 Jul; 39(1):107-13. 

18. Bessent RG, Watson WS, MacDonald CM, Adams JF. Application of the occupancy principle in studies 
of the metabolism of vitamin B12 in man. Clinical Science. 1980 Feb; 58(2):169-71. 

19. Devi S, Pasanna RM, Shamshuddin Z, Bhat K, Sivadas A, Mandal AK, Kurpad AV. Measuring vitamin 
B-12 bioavailability with [13C]-cyanocobalamin in humans. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2020 Aug 25. 

248 
 



 
 

20. Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey, 2016-2018.  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Govt of 
India. 2019.https://nhm.gov.in/WriteReadData/l892s/1405796031571201348.pdf 

21. Baker SJ, Jacob E, Rajan KT, Swaminathan SP. Vitamin-B12 deficiency in pregnancy and the puerperium. 
BMJ. 1962; 1(5293):1658. 

22. Loria A, Vaz-Pinto A, Arroyo P, Ramírez-Mateos C, Sánchez-Medal L. Nutritional anemia. VI. Fetal 
hepatic storage of metabolites in the second half of pregnancy. Journal of Pediatrics. 1977; 91(4):569-73. 

23. Vaz Pinto A, Torras V, Sandoval JF, Dillman E, Mateos CR, Cordova MS. Folic acid and vitamin B12 
determination in fetal liver. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1975; 28(10):1085-6. 

24. Pawlak R, Vos P, Shahab-Ferdows S, Hampel D, Allen LH, Perrin MT. Vitamin B12content in breast milk 
of vegan, vegetarian, and non-vegetarian lactating women in the United States. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 2018; 108(3):525-31. 

25. Madhavapeddi R and Narasinga Rao BS. Energy balance in lactating undernourished Indian women. 
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1992; 46: 349-354. 

26. Bønaa KH, Njølstad I, Ueland PM, Schirmer H, Tverdal A, Steigen T, Wang H, Nordrehaug JE, Arnesen 
E, Rasmussen K. Homocysteine lowering and cardiovascular events after acute myocardial infarction. 
New England Journal of Medicine. 2006 Apr 13; 354(15):1578-88. 

27. Lonn E. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) 2 Investigators. Homocysteine lowering with 
folic acid and B vitamins in vascular disease. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2006;3:414-5. 

 

249 
 



 
 

12.7  ASCORBIC ACID (VITAMIN C) 
 

12.7.1. Function 
 

Ascorbic acid or vitamin C is a six-carbon lactone which is synthesized from glucose by many 
animals, but not by man. It is an electron donor and therefore a reducing agent or antioxidant.  All of 
its biochemical and molecular functions can be accounted for, by this function. Ascorbic acid acts as 
an electron donor for 8 enzymes. e.g. hydroxylation of collagen, biosynthesis of carnitine, and 
catecholamines1. Ascorbic acid in gastric juice has been shown to prevent the formation of N-nitroso 
compounds, which are potentially mutagenic2. High intakes of ascorbic acid correlate with reduced 
gastric cancer risk3. Ascorbic acid protects low-density lipoproteins ex vivo against oxidation and 
may function similarly in the blood. 

 

There are reports that the antioxidant properties of ascorbic acid may stabilize folate in food 
and in plasma, and cause increased excretion of oxidized folate derivatives in human scurvy4. 
Similarly, Ascorbic acid promotes absorption of soluble non-heme iron possibly either by chelation 
or simply by maintaining the iron in the reduced (ferrous, Fe2+) form or both. This effect can be 
achieved with the amounts of ascorbic acid obtained in foods. However, the amount of dietary 
ascorbic acid required to increase iron absorption ranges from 25 mg upwards and depends largely 
on the amount of inhibitors, such as phytates and polyphenols present in the meal5. 

 

Recent studies have shown potential health effects of ascorbic acid in decreasing risk of 
cardiovascular accidents and asthma, cancer morbidity and mortality, prevention of cataract and its 
impact on common cold6. 
 

12.7.2. Overview of significant scientific information 
 

The amount of ascorbic acid required to prevent or cure early signs of deficiency is between 6.5 
mg and 10 mg/day.  In many developing countries, limitations in the supply of ascorbic acid are often 
determined by seasonal factors as well as food handling and culinary practices.  
 

Dietary sources Table 12.7.1: Average ascorbic acid 
 content (raw) per 100g 

Good sources of ascorbic acid include citrus fruits, 
Ascorbic 

tomatoes, berries and green vegetables. Potato is an Food stuffs 
acid (mg)* 

important staple food in many countries that provide the 
Cereals 0.00 

required ascorbic acid even though its ascorbic acid 
Pulses and Legumes 0-3 

concentration is low. The average ascorbic acid content 
of raw foodstuffs is given in Table 12.7.1 Leafy vegetables 60-250 

 Roots and Tubers 10-40 
Stability of ascorbic acid during processing Other vegetables 20- 80 
 Nuts & Oilseeds 0-7 

Ascorbic acid is sensitive to heat, light and oxygen Condiments & Spices 0-50 
and interacts with copper, iron and tin7. In the dry state, 

Fruits 45-600 
ascorbic acid is reasonably stable in air, but in solution, 

Fish 10-30 
it is rapidly oxidized. During storage, losses have been 

Meat and Poultry 2.00-20 
found to vary (8-35%). It may also darken on exposure 

Milk and milk products 1-6 
to light, moisture and heat. Cooking typically destroys 
ascorbic acid by accelerating the oxidation reaction. *Cooking reduces ascorbic acid content by 
Exposure to low pH value enhances its stability while high more than 60-75%.  
pH is deleterious8. Oxidative destruction of ascorbic acid 
occurs as a consequence of two factors, temperature increase and length of exposure. Heat processing 
methods have different impacts on ascorbic acid stability. After sterilization of milk at 131˚C for 5 

250 
 



 
 

minutes, retention was 35% while ultra-high temperature processing at 141˚C for 4 seconds retains 
57% of the original ascorbic acid content9. Baking seems to have a more destructive effect on ascorbic 
acid than boiling. Retention of ascorbic acid in sweet potato after 30 min of boiling was 45.6% while 
the value after the same time period under baking condition was 30.3%10. Boiling causes losses to an 
average 10% higher than with steaming11. Overcooking leads to a major loss of nutrient.  

 

Ascorbic acid was found to be more stable during frying than on pressure cooking and boiling, 
since the temperature inside the food never exceeds 100˚C. In addition, frying is usually for very 
short periods and there is no leaching of water-soluble vitamins12.  Iron absorption studies have shown 
a reduction or lack of effect on ascorbic acid when the vitamin was added to meals before cooking, 
baking, or even warming for prolonged duration13,14.  Traditional household processing method used 
in Punjab was found to retain about 74% and provided 46 mg of ascorbic acid per 100 g15. Also the 
retention of ascorbic acid was better when GLV were mixed with other food ingredients and the 
prepared dishes had much higher ascorbic acid (losses of only 33%) than when the main ingredient 
vegetable alone was cooked16. 
 

12.7.3. Requirement 
 

 For more than a century, the essentiality of ascorbic acid in preventing scurvy has been 
undisputed; yet, the actual requirement remains widely debated, with different approaches, the result 
of which has been the disparities among various countries across the globe in fixing the RDA, ranging 
from 40 to 220 mg/day. In the USA, the RDAs for males have been successively changed from 
75mg/day in 194317, 60mg/day in 196818, 198019 and 198920; 45mg/day in 197421, while the most 
recent revision in 2000 was fixed at 90 mg/day6. Countries like UK22, Australia23, New Zealand23 and 
India24 have based their RDA on FAO/WHO recommendations at 40-45 mg/day and have been 
countries with the lowest RDAs for ascorbic acid. In contrast, the RDA in Netherlands25 is 75 mg/day 
and Germany, Austria and Switzerland26 is 110 mg/day. The Chinese have adopted 2 
recommendations -100 mg/day to prevent scurvy and 200 mg/day for decreasing non communicable 
diseases risk27. 
  

The cause for such disparities lies in the criteria and estimates used in deriving EARs and RDAs. 
Estimates of the values of body pool and absorption efficiency vary which contributes to the 
variations in RDAs. Four distinct criteria are used globally: Intakes sufficient for –  

 

i. Preventing scurvy 
ii. Partly saturating immune cells (neutrophils) with ascorbic acid while limiting its excretion 

iii. Replacing daily turnover to maintain adequate plasma levels 
iv. Attempting optimization of individual’s health by using optimal rather than sufficient amount 

of vitamin C. 
 

Scurvy can be effectively prevented with relatively little vitamin C – some have estimated as 
little as 10 mg/day28. Estimating EARs using this as criteria is potentially erroneous as they are based 
on body pool estimations from a time when the complexity of vitamin C pharmacokinetics was not 
fully understood29.  

 

The criterion chosen for the USA and Canadian EAR estimation6 was “the vitamin C intake 
that maintains near-maximal neutrophil concentrations with minimal urinary excretion of ascorbate” 
However, this has been criticized over choosing extrapolated values on graphs rather than actual data 
points, concentrations used for determining antioxidant protection and the rationale of using emerging 
urinary excretion as an indicator for saturation of body stores30. Body pool estimations are basis for 
calculating EARs by EFSA and also by WHO/FAO. WHO/FAOs recommendations come from the 
calculation based on a value half way between body pool saturation in men (1500 mg) and the point 
where deficiency occurs (about 300–400 mg), i.e. a value of 900 mg. Multiplying with the rate of 

251 
 



 
 

turnover (2.9% per day) and correcting for absorption efficiency (85%) and twice the estimated 
coefficient of variation (estimated at 20%) results in 44 mg/day rounded up to the recommendation 
of 45 mg/day. The EFSA on the other hand, used the following rationale: the body pool in men 
(1500 mg) is multiplied by the metabolic loss (2.9% per day) and compensated for the urinary loss 
(25% per day) and absorption efficiency (80%). Adding twice the estimated coefficient of variation 
(estimated at 10%) results in the recommendation of 110 mg/d for men30. 
 

Methodology for calculating EAR and RDA of Ascorbic acid 

Males 
The present recommendation is based on the rationale that the body pool saturation of ascorbic 

acid was 900mg. Considering metabolic loss of 2.9% per day, compensating for the urinary loss of 
25% per day, and taking absorption efficiency of 50% in Indian foods31, the EAR was calculated as 
65 mg/day for males. A CV of 10% was used and RDA of 78 mg/day was arrived at, which was 
rounded off to 80 mg per day.  

 

Females 

As no value for metabolic losses was available in women, the EAR for women was 
extrapolated from the EAR for men. On the basis of differences in reference body weight, EAR was 
set at 55 mg/day for women, and using a CV of 10% the RDA was calculated as 65 mg/day. 
 

Children 
 

EARs for children have been estimated based on relative body weights, as a function of 
reference weights and growth, using the formula6: 

 

EAR child = EAR adult x F, where  

F   = (Weight of child/weight of adult)0.75 x (1+GF) 

GF                    = 0.57 for ages up to 1 years,  
0.25 for ages 1 to 3,  
0.06 for ages 4 to 6, 
0.13 for ages 7 to 9, 
In ages 10 to 15 – 0.11 for boys and 0.08 for girls, 
In ages 16 to 17 – 0.08 for boys and 0.03 for girls. 

Pregnancy 
 

For pregnant women, in the absence of precise data regarding transfer of maternal vitamin C 
to the fetus, evidence that intakes of 7 mg/day of vitamin C will prevent young infants from 
developing scurvy, the EAR for pregnancy was estimated to increase by10 mg/day over the vitamin 
C requirement for the non-pregnant woman. Subsequently, 15 mg/day additional requirements were 
added to RDA6.  
 

Lactation 
 

To estimate the EAR for lactation, the average vitamin C produced in milk, 40 mg/day during 
the first 6 months of lactation, was added to the EAR of the nonlactating women. Accordingly, an 
additional allotment of extra 50 mg/day was added over and above the regular RDA of pre-pregnant 
state6. 
 

12.7.4. TUL for ascorbic acid 
 

 The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the highest level of daily nutrient intake that is likely 
to pose no risk of adverse health effects in almost all individuals. Although members of the general 
population should be advised not to exceed the UL routinely, intake above the UL may be appropriate 
for investigation within well-controlled clinical trials. In light of evaluating possible benefits to 
health, clinical trials of doses above the UL should not be discouraged, as long as subjects 

252 
 



 
 

participating in these trials have signed informed consent documents regarding possible toxicity and 
as long as these trials employ appropriate safety monitoring of trial subjects. Also, the UL is not 
meant to apply to individuals who are receiving vitamin C under medical supervision. 
  

 Reviews of high vitamin C intakes have indicated low toxicity; adverse effects have been 
reported primarily after very large doses (greater than 3 g/day)32. Saturable intestinal absorption and 
renal tubular reabsorption data suggest that overload of ascorbic acid is unlikely in humans33. Possible 
adverse effects associated with very high intakes have been reviewed and include: diarrhea and other 
gastrointestinal disturbances, increased oxalate excretion and kidney stone formation, increased uric 
acid excretion, pro-oxidant effects, systemic conditioning (“rebound scurvy”), increased iron 
absorption leading to iron overload, reduced vitamin B12 and copper status, increased oxygen 
demand, and erosion of dental enamel34,35. 
  

 Gastrointestinal disturbances such as nausea, abdominal cramps, and diarrhoea are the most 
common adverse effects of high vitamin C intake36. These effects are attributed to the osmotic effect 
of unabsorbed vitamin C passing through the intestine. Based on considerations of causality, 
relevance, and the quality and completeness of the database, osmotic diarrhoea and related 
gastrointestinal disturbances were selected as the critical endpoints on which to base a UL. 

 

 Human data suggest that an intake of vitamin C greater than 3 g/day is likely to cause osmotic 
diarrhoea in many individuals, although some reports involving a few individuals suggest this may 
occur at 3 g/day. Thus, the 3-g/day intake is considered a LOAEL. An uncertainty factor (UF) of 1.5 
was selected to extrapolate the LOAEL to a NOAEL. Thus, the 3 g/day intake is considered a 
LOAEL, and a NOAEL or TUL of 2 g/day is estimated for adult humans6. 
  

 For children, TULs were adjusted to weight at the rate similar to adults, i.e., 31 mg/kg/day and 
as 36 mg/kg/day in case of girls. The values were rounded off to the nearest 50mg. Since no 
teratogenicity is recorded in ascorbic acid overdose, the TULs in pregnant and lactating women 
remain same as in non-pregnant state. 
 

12.7.5. Summary of RDA and TUL for ascorbic acid 
 

Effect of ascorbic acid on non-heme iron absorption in human 
 

Ascorbic Acid with its reducing and chelating properties is the most efficient non-heme iron 
absorption enhancer, when its stability in the food vehicle is ensured37. An adequate intake of ascorbic 
acid is however required in the context of fixing the requirement of iron from vegetable foods. The 
committee on RDA (2010) examined the possibility of ensuring adequate iron absorption from typical 
meals consumed in India, which is considered to be high in inhibitors and low in promoters of iron 
absorption. Absorption studies have confirmed that increase in iron absorption is observed only when 
the two are consumed together and not when ascorbic acid was administered several hours before 
meal38. In the context of instability of ascorbic acid during food processing (60-70%) and storage, 
obtaining sufficient ascorbic acid to improve iron availability is a difficult proposition. Also the molar 
proportion of ascorbic acid to iron to be present in the food for an effective improvement in iron 
absorption has not been established with Indian diet.  

 

 A number of research studies have been carried out on this aspect, covering both semi-synthetic 
meal and natural meal. 
 

Effect of different ascorbic acid: iron ratios on iron absorption 
 

Promotion of iron absorption in the presence of ascorbic acid is more pronounced in a 
composite meal containing inhibitors of iron absorption. The effect of ascorbic acid and other 
enhancers or inhibitors of iron absorption was examined in several studies using the single meal 

253 
 



 
 

technique in which the non-heme iron component of the meal is labelled either with a radioisotope or 
stable isotope of iron. 

 

Table 12.7.2: RDA of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) for various physiological groups 
 

RDA 2020 IOM 
Physiological Body weight TUL H-AR 

EAR RDA RDA 
Group (Kg) (mg/day) (mg/day) 

(mg/day) (mg/day) (mg/day) 

Adult Men 65 65 80 2000 90 90 
Adult Women 55 55 65 2000 80 75 
Pregnant 55+GWG 55+10 65+15 2000 80 85 
Lactating 55+ 55+40 65+50 2000 145 120 
Infants (0-6 mo) 5.8 - 20 (AI) - - 40 (AI) 
Infants (6-12 mo) 8.5 - 27 (AI) - - 50 (AI) 
Children (1-3 y) 11.7 22 27 350 15 15 
Children (4-6 y) 18.3 27 32 550 25 25 

25 (7-8) 
Children (7-9 y) 25.3 36 43 800 40 

45 (9) 
Boys (10-12 y) 34.9 45 54 1050 60 45 
Girls (10-12 y) 36.4 44 52 1300 60 45 
Boys (13-15 y) 50.5 60 72 1550 60 75 
Girls (13-15 y) 49.6 55 66 1800 60 75 
Boys (16-18 y) 64.4 69 82 1950 85 75 
Girls (16-18 y) 55.7 57 68 2000 75 75 

 

H-AR: Harmonized average requirement  
 

 A meal containing low-to-medium levels of inhibitors requires the addition of ascorbic acid at 
a molar ratio of 2:1 (e.g., 20 mg ascorbic acid: 3 mg iron)39. To promote absorption in the presence 
of high levels of inhibitors, ascorbic acid needs to be added at a molar ratio in excess of 4:1, which 
may be impractical40. The dose-response relationship obtained from a semi-synthetic meal containing 
4:1 mg iron and ascorbic acid in doses ranging from 25 to 1000 mg is best described by a steep linear 
response up to a 7.5 molar ratio of ascorbic acid to iron, followed by a less pronounced linear dose-
response for molar ratios above 7.5, as shown in figure 12.7.1 38,39. All such data advocating enhanced 
ascorbic acid intake were of short term 
duration or mainly confined to meals and not Figure 12.7.1: The effect of ascorbic acid on 

whole diets. Later data by Cook and Reddy41 iron absorption from a semi-synthetic meal 
5

demonstrated that the beneficial effect of 
high levels of ascorbic acid on dietary non-
heme iron absorption was lost on long term 4

consumption, raising doubts about the 
efficacy of such step to improve iron 3

absorption. Data within India show that a 
dietary intake of 40 mg of ascorbic acid can 

2
be easily achieved and such consumption 
was associated with good iron absorption 
and good iron status15. Thus, at least 40 mg 1

of ascorbic acid should be available in the 
small intestine at the time of iron absorption 0

from a day’s meal.   0 10 20 30 40 50

Ascorbic acid: iron 

254 
 

% iron absorption



 
 

References 

1. Levine M. New concepts in the biology and biochemistry of ascorbic acid. New England Journal of 
Medicine. 1986 Apr 3; 314(14):892-902. 

2. Mirvish SS. Effects of vitamins C and E on N‐nitroso compound formation, carcinogenesis, and cancer. 
Cancer. 1986 Oct 15; 58(S8):1842-50. 

3. Liu and Russel RM.  Nutrition and gastric cancer risk: An update. Nut Rev 66(5):237-249, 2008. 

4. Stokes PL, Melikian V, Leeming RL et al.  Folate metabolism in scurvy. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 1975; 28(2):126-9. 

5. Siegenberg D, Baynes R.D, Bothwell TH, et al. Ascorbic acid prevents the dose-dependent inhibitory 
effects of polyphenols and phytates on nonheme-iron absorption. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
1991; 53: 537–41. 

6. Monsen ER. Dietary reference intakes for the antioxidant nutrients: vitamin C, vitamin E, selenium, and 
carotenoids. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 2000 Jun 1; 100(6):637. 

7. Bauernfeind JC. Antioxidant function of L-ascorbic acid in food technology. International journal for 
vitamin and nutrition research. Supplement=Internationale Zeitschrift fur Vitamin-und 
Ernahrungsforschung. Supplement. 1985; 27:307. 

8. Quadri SF, Liang YT, Seib PA, Deyoe CW, Hoseney RC. Stability of 1‐ascorbate 2‐sulfate and 1‐ascorbate 
in wheat foods and milk. Journal of Food Science. 1975 Jul; 40(4):837-9. 

9. Raffier. The influence of added trace elements on the stability of vitamins in milk based infant formulas. 
Dissertation for Doctor’s Degree. 1998.  

10. Abdel‐Kader ZM. Effect of boiling and baking on the content of some nutrients of sweet potatoes. 
Food/Nahrung. 1991; 35(3):321-4. 

11. Paulus K. Changes in nutritional quality of foods in catering. Journal of Nutritional Science and 
Vitaminology. 1990; 36: Suppl (1), 35S-45S. 

12. Fillion L, Henry CJ. Nutrient losses and gains during frying: a review. International journal of food 
sciences and nutrition. 1998 Jan 1; 49(2):157-68. 

13. Sayer MH, Lynch SR, Jacobs P, Charlton RW, Bothwell TH, Walker RB, and Mayet F. The effects of 
ascorbic acid supplementation on the absorption of iron in maize, wheat and soy. British Journal of 
Haematology. 1973; 24: 209-18. 

14. Hallberg L, Rossander L, Persson H. and Svahn E. Deleterious effects of prolonged warming of meals on 
ascorbic acid content and iron absorption. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1982; 36: 846–50. 

15. Gupta S, Bains K. Traditional cooked vegetable dishes as important sources of ascorbic acid and β-
carotene in the diets of Indian urban and rural families. Food and nutrition bulletin. 2006 Dec; 27(4):306-
10. 

16. Agte V, Tarwadi K, Mengale S, Hinge A, Chiplonkar S. Vitamin profile of cooked foods: how healthy is 
the practice of ready-to-eat foods? International journal of food sciences and nutrition. 2002 Jan 1; 
53(3):197-208. 

17. Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council. Recommended dietary allowances. Nutrition 
Reviews 1. 1943; (6):164–8. 

18. Staff of National Academy of Science. Recommended dietary allowance, 7th ed. Washington, DC: National 
Academy of Science. 1968. 

19. Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council. Recommended dietary allowances, 9th 
ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences. 1980.  

255 
 



 
 

20. National Academy of Sciences. National Research Council Subcommittee on the Tenth Edition of the 
Recommended Dietary Allowances. Recommended Dietary Allowances, 10th ed. Washington 
(DC): National Academy of Sciences. 1989. 

21. Committee on Dietary Allowances.  Recommended dietary allowances, 8th ed. Washington DC: National 
Academy of Sciences. 1974. 

22. Dietary reference values for food energy and nutrients for the United Kingdom.  Report of the panel on 
dietary reference values of the committee on medical aspects of food policy. Report on Health and Social 
Subjects (London). 1991. 41: 1–210. 

23. National Health and Medical Research Council.  Nutrient reference values for Australia and New Zealand: 
Executive summary. In Department of Health and Ageing, editor, 89. Canberra: National Health and 
Medical Research Council. 2006.  

24. Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary allowances for Indians. A report of the expert group of 
the Indian Council of Medical Research. Hyderabad: National Institute of Nutrition; Indian Council of 
Medical Research. 2010. 

25. Health Council of the Netherlands.  Dietary reference values for vitamins and minerals for adults. 2018. 

26. German Nutrition Society (DGE).  AÖaSS. D-A-CH reference levels for nutrient intake. Bonn. 2015b. 

27. Chinese Nutrition Society. 2014. Chinese dietary reference intakes. Beijing: China Science Publishing 
House. 

28. Hodges RE,  Hood J,  Canham JE,  Sauberlich HE and Baker EM. Clinical manifestations of ascorbic acid 
deficiency in man. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1971; (4):432–43. 

29. Lykkesfeldt J and  Tveden-Nyborg P.  The pharmacokinetics of vitamin C Nutrients. 2019;11(10):2412.  

30. Carr AC, Lykkesfeldt J. Discrepancies in global vitamin C recommendations: a review of RDA criteria 
and underlying health perspectives. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 2020 Mar 28:1-4. 

31. ICMR. Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary Allowances for Indians. A Report of the Expert 
Group of the Indian Council of Medical Research, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 1990. 

32. Johnston CS. Biomarkers for establishing a tolerable upper intake level for vitamin C. Nutrition reviews. 
1999 Mar 1; 57(3):71-7. 

33. Blanchard J, Tozer TN, Rowland M. 1997. Pharmacokinetic perspectives on mega-doses of ascorbic 
acid. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1997; 66:1165–1171 

34. Hornig DH. The safety of high vitamin C intake in man. Vitamin C. 1981; 225. 

35. Rivers, JM. Safety of high-level vitamin C ingestion. Annals of New York Academy Sciences. 1987; 
498:445–454. 

36. Hoffer A. Ascorbic acid and toxicity. The New England journal of medicine. 1971 Sep; 285(11):635-6. 

37. Conrad ME and Schade SG.  Ascorbic acid chelates in iron absorption: a role for hydrochloric acid and 
bile. Gastroenterology.1968; 55: 35–45. 

38. Cook JD and Monsen ER. Ascorbic acid, the common cold, and iron absorption. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 1997; 30: 235–241. 

39. Hurrell R. How to ensure adequate iron absorption from iron-fortified food. Nutrition reviews. 2002; 
60:S7-15. 

40. Teucher, Olivares, Cori. Enhancers of iron absorption: ascorbic acid and other organic acids. International 
Journal for Vitamin and Nutrition Research. 2004 Nov 1; 74(6):403-19. 

41. Cook JD, Reddy MB. Effect of ascorbic acid intake on nonheme-iron absorption from a complete diet. 
The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2001 Jan 1; 73(1):93-8. 

 

256 
 



 

13.  FAT SOLUBLE VITAMINS 
 

 
13.1 VITAMIN A 
 

Significance 
 

Vitamin A is an essential nutrient, must be provided as a part of the diet. Pro-vitamin A 
carotenoids such as -carotene, -carotene, and -cryptoxanthin abundant in plant foods 
(vegetables and fruits) are the primary dietary source of vitamin A.  Preformed vitamin A (retinyl 
esters) is obtained from animal foods such as milk, egg and meat products. In addition, fortified 
foods (milk and oil), health beverages and supplements also provide preformed vitamin A. Vitamin 
A plays a vital role in vision, maintenance of overall health due to the involvement in a wide variety 
of biological activities including the embryonic development and immune system. 
 

Deficiency 
 

One of the earliest manifestations of vitamin A deficiency (VAD) is night blindness and more 
severe deficiencies include ocular changes leading to blindness, particularly in young children. 
National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau surveys indicate that, during the past three decades there has 
been virtual disappearance of keratomalacia, and a sharp decline in the prevalence of clinical 
symptoms of VAD (Bitot’s spots 0.4%) in India1-2. The prevalence of sub-clinical vitamin A 
deficiency among pre-school children reduced from 64% in the year 20121 to 17.4% in the year 
20183. Though there has been a significant reduction in severe Vitamin A deficiency over the last 
three decades, it remains a nutritional challenge in many sections of the populations. Poor dietary 
intakes imposed by poverty or knowledge, recurrent infections and concomitant deficiency of other 
nutrients (protein, zinc etc.,) are thought to be the major etiological factors of vitamin A deficiency 
in populations. 
 

Vitamin A homeostasis 
 

The dietary preformed retinol is absorbed in the intestinal cells via a saturable process, but the 
mechanisms remain unknown as yet4. The dietary pro-vitamin A carotenoids are assembled into 
micells during gastro-inestinal digestion and absorbed in enterocytes via a carrier mediated process. 
Within the intestinal cells4, part of the provitamin A carotenoids (β-carotene: equivlent to 2 retinol; 
while α carotene and β-cryptoxanthine: yeilds 1 molecule of retinol) undergoes central cleavage to 
yeild retinol, a process that appear to dependent on the actual vitamin A status of the host -lower the 
status; higher the conversion. The intestinal retinol (esterfied) or carotenoids are then assembled in 
chylomicrons and secreted into lymphatic circulation5 taken up and stored by the liver. About 80% 
of the whole body retinol was found in liver, while the rest is in adipose (15%) and other tissues. 
The retinol is then excreted into the blood via a carrier protein called retinol binding protein (RBP), 
which in turn delivers it to the target tissues6. The eye, for its visual function and the skin are the 
two most important tisuses that have high demands of retinol for their normal function. 
Predominant part of vitamin A, in the form of oxidized vitamin A metabolites are excreted in the 
urine7. In addition, the retinol is metabolized in liver into veriety of metabolites, which are mainly 
excreted through bile7. Therefore, entero-biliary axis is the major pathway that regulates the whole 
body vitamin A homeostasis.  Numerous other factors such inflammation, protein and zinc 
deficiency are known to negatively influence the vitamin A utilization, independent of actual 
vitamin A status7.  

257 
 



 

 
Carotene conversion 
 

In addition to preformed vitamin A from animal derived foods, the pro-vitamin A carotenoids 
forms the major source of vitamin A from green leafy vegetables and fruits. Theoretically each       
β-carotene molecule yields two retinol (RAE), while α-carotene and β-cryptoxanthine yield one 
molecule of retinol. However, multiple dietary and host related factors influence these ratios. The 
conversion of β-carotene (BC) to vitamin A is most debated, as it forms an important factor in 
setting the dietary requirements and in assessing the dietary vitamin A adequacy of the population. 
The knowledge on the carotenoid speciation, digestion, metabolism and its conversion expanded in 
both molecular and clinical fronts in the past decade, particularly with the cloning and 
characterization of β-carotene dioxynase5 and application of stable isotopic tracer studies8-9. The 
important development that needs to be considered are carotenoid conversion related to the dose 
administered (higher the intakes, lower the conversion) and the vitamin A status of subjects (higher 
the status; lower the conversion). The intact carotenoids are both absorbed and converted to vitamin 
A post absorptively in multiple tissues. 

 

The dietary guidelines of IOM considered 12:1 ratio as opposed to 6:1 by WHO, while the 
previous ICMR RDA committee (2010) considered an 8:1 ratio by triangulation to find the best 
conversion ratios that explains the subclinical vitamin A deficiency across different regions of the 
world. The carotene conversion ratios are mainly derived from studies that measured the plasma 
area under the curve (AUC) of a standard β-carotene, retinol and test food which varied from 2:1 to 
55:1. These variations are primarily due to base line vitamin A status, food matrix and consumption 
of dietary fat9. Since, speciation and composition of carotenoids in food matrix is unique at least to 
food groups (GLV vs carrot, potato, fruits etc.), extrinsic labelling studies are not suitable to assess 
the conversion of endogenous carotenoids10. Literature search in PubMed with key words (carotene) 
OR ("green leafy vegetables") AND (conversion) AND (equivalence) retrieved 41 studies, of which 
6 studies11-15 reported the conversion estimates using intrinsic labelling of test foods,  reported post 
absorptive conversion (≥21 days), dose administered and base line vitamin A status (plasma vitamin 
A) of the study subjects.  Of these, one study measured the conversion of standard β-carotene in 
oil12 and thus was not considered for inclusion. Another study16 that measured the bioconversion of 
carotene from kale in children reported 13 and 11:1 conversion at 1.5 mg of β -carotene intake, and 
was considered an outlier. This study also did not measure the sequential blood samples in all the 
children.  

 
Table 13.1.1 shows the details of age, base line vitamin A status, food type, dose of carotene 

and reported conversion ratios by weight. The conversion ratio is strongly correlated (Pearson 
correlation) with dose of β-carotene administered (0.932; 0.002), but not with duration of study 
(0.085; 0.856), BMI (0.468; 0.290) or age of subjects (0.433; 0.332). Further, base line vitamin A 
status also did not correlate with conversion ratio (0.234; 0.613), which is rather unexpected. It is 
important to note that the base line status of all the study subjects was more than adequate (20 
µg/dL), which might have hampered this relationship. Further, regression of β-carotene dose with 
conversion ratio (Figure 13.1.1) showed a linear relationship (r2=0.86; slope: 1.46 and intercept: 
1.8). These observations clearly indicate that the conversion ratio is strongly dependent on the 
dietary intake of carotene. A recent study in Indian urban adults using 3-day dietary recall17 found 
that the median dietary intake of β-carotene equivalents was 1.55 mg (n=897; IQR 0.73-2.9 mg). 
Therefore, assuming maximum intake of carotenoids in Indian adult population at ~3 mg/day 
(conversion= 1.46*3+1.8=6.18), a conservative conversion factor of 6:1 was considered for setting 
vitamin A requirements. The conversion factors for other carotenoids such as β-cryptoxanthine and 
α-carotene were set at 12:1, for computing the vitamin A equivalents of dietary carotenoids. It is 

258 
 



 

also worth mentioning here that the conversion factor could be more efficient in subjects with 
compromised vitamin A status and/or intakes below that were considered in this computation. 

 

Table 13.1.1: Carotene conversion ratios from intrinsically labelled test foods 
 

Baseline Duration Carotene 
Study Food Age BMI Conversion 

s.retinol SD SD SD 
type (years) (kg/m2 of study dose SD 

reference ) by weight 
(µg/dL) (days) (mg) 

Guangwen 
Tang et al., Spinach 50.4 9.24 57.1 6.5 26.1 3.0 35.0 10.95 20.9 9.0 
2005. 
Guangwen 
Tang et al., Carrot 56.0 11.2 57.1 6.5 26.1 3.0 35.0 10.3 14.8 6.5 
2005. 

Jie Wang et al., 
Spirulina 47.9 9.24 48.1 5.7 23.4 3.1 48.0 4.2 4.5 1.6 

2008. 

Guangwen 
Golden 

Tang et al., 25.6 5.8 7.0 1.0 14.4 - 21.0 0.6 2.3 0.8 
rice 

2012. 

GuangwenTang 
Spinach 24.2 3.5 7.0 1.0 14.4 - 21.0 1.4 7.5 0.8 

et al., 2012. 

Guangwen 
Golden 

Tang et al., 62.7 14.8 59.0 11.0 26.0 2.5 36.0 1.26 3.8 1.7 
rice 

2009. 
Tawanda et al., Yellow 

59.2 17.1 48.4 10 22.4 3.1 36.0 1.2 3.2 1.5 
2011. maize 

 
Figure 13.1.1: Relationship of β-carotene dose with efficiency of conversion 

 
30  

 
25  

Coefficients:  
20 b[0]1.8  

b[1]1.4  
r ²0.87 

15  
 
 

10 
 
 

5 
 
 

0  
 

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
 

Caroten e dose (mg) 

 
Derivation of average daily vitamin A (retinol) requirements in Indian adults and young 
children 

Changes from the ICMR 2010 recommendation for vitamin A requirement 

The following changes were made:  

a. Since EAR is more relevant in population context, an effort was made to systematically derive 
the EAR and RDA using factorial approach. 

259 
 

Carotene conversion (by weight) 



 

b. The factorial computation of vitamin A requirements was done using a similar methodology, 
but several assumptions in the previous RDA were revised. 

 

c. The carotene conversion ratio was revised to account for tissue conversion, based on recent 
knowledge. 

 
ADULTS 

The factorial model for determining daily requirements 
 

The dietary requirement for maintaining normal vitamin A status in healthy well-nourished 
Indian adults was calculated using the factorial approach described by Olson18-19. This approach 
defines the EAR of vitamin A as the daily intake required to balance its daily catabolic loss, which 
is calculated from an assumed daily loss from the body stores, the absorption and efficiency of 
storage, as described below7,19-20. This method has been adopted by IOM and EFSA in their 
recommendations, with different assumptions for each of the factors7,20. 

 

In this factorial method, six factors are considered, with their assumed values as in the EFSA 
recommendation20. 

X = Percent of the vitamin A store lost per day (0.7%) 
N = Minimum acceptable liver vitamin A reserve for health (20 µg/g liver tissue) 
Y = Liver weight: body weight ratio (0.022 for adults and 0.034 for children 1-5y; derived) 
W = Reference weight for specific age groups and genders 
P = Ratio of total body vitamin A store to liver vitamin A store (1.25; assuming 80% of the  

total body store is in the liver) 
Z = Efficiency of storage of ingested vitamin A (50%) 

The assumption of numeric values and the CV for each of the factors is discussed below.  
 

Daily catabolic loss (X)  
 

The vitamin A lost through urine and faeces was reported to be 128 µg/d. In initial 
considerations by the IOM, this was based on the excretion of radio labeled vitamin A in subjects 
on a vitamin A-free diet, and calculated to be 0.5% of the pool/day21-22. In later tracer experiments, 
Cifelli and co-workers23 found much higher catabolic rates in healthy Chinese and US adults with 
high vitamin A stores, but these rates were positively correlated with the store size. Cifelli and co-
workers24 also showed in rats that vitamin A losses are related to the vitamin A status. When the 
pool size is lower, as considered in the factorial model (see below), where the minimum pool size 
compatible with health is considered, the catabolic rates will be lower. Therefore, a daily pool loss 
of 0.7% was conservatively considered by EFSA20, and this has been assumed to be relevant in 
Indian adults and children, until direct measurements are made here (Table 13.1.2). The CV for this 
factor was taken as 21%18-19. It is worth mentioning that the CV of the requirement is taken as 20% 
by IOM and EFSA7-20, and probably comes from this single factor value. 

 

Minimum acceptable liver stores (N)  
 

The minimal acceptable liver reserve was based on the vitamin A concentration in liver tissue 
at which (i) no clinical signs of VAD are observed, (ii) adequate plasma retinol concentrations are 
maintained (iii) induced biliary excretion of vitamin A is observed, and (iv) protection against VAD 
is provided for approximately 4 months while on a vitamin A deficient diet.  This was shown to be 
0.07 µmol/g or 20 µg/g in rat models25-26. There have been recent reports that the acceptable liver 
store should be 0.1 µmol/g based on rat studies27 or that liver fibrosis has been shown to occur at a 
value of 0.065 µmol/g in a Mongolian gerbil model28. Equally, no liver abnormality (based on 
enzymes) was observed in Bangladeshi adult subjects who had liver stores ranging from 0.02 to 0.3 

260 
 



 

µmol/g8 and in Bengaluru, India, a stable isotope based measurement of total body retinol stores on 
28 healthy NPNL young adult women with normal liver function, found that 3 (11%) of them had 
liver stores that were less than 0.07 µmol/g. There is uncertainty in what the minimum acceptable 
store should be, but based on the earlier considerations, a liver retinol concentration of 0.07µmol/g 
or 20 µg/g in a healthy person assumed to fulfill all physiological needs and to provide an adequate 
reserve for at least three months. This value is considered for both adults and children, and taken as 
a fixed factor. 

 

Table 13.1.2: Average daily requirement of Vitamin A in Adults –  
using current statistical method  

 
Indian Indian 

men women 

Wt (Kg)  65 55 

Liver: body weight ratio 0.022 0.022 

Liver store concentration (µg/g) 20 20 

Daily loss (% of total body store) 0.7 0.7 

Total body store: Liver store ratio 1.25 1.25 

Efficiency of storage of intake in store 50% 50% 

EAR (µg RAE / day)1 464 392 

RDA (µg RAE / day)1 998 844 

EAR (µg RAE / day)2 501 424 

RDA (µg RAE / day)2 1088 920 
 

1. Multiplicative model assuming reported values of factors as mean (current method described, 
and recommended) 

2. Multiplicative model assuming reported values of factors as median (IOM/EFSA method) 

Liver to body weight ratio (Y)  
 

To calculate the absolute value of liver reserve, the liver weight is required, which must be 
multiplied into the desirable (as above) liver retinol concentration. The IOM and EFSA used a body 
weight factor to estimate the liver size7,20. However, a literature search revealed that the liver size 
varies by ethnicity, and is thought to be smaller in Indians/Asians. Therefore, liver/body weight 
ratio was derived for Indian population through a review of literature. A Pubmed search [("liver 
volume") OR ("liver weight") OR ("liver morphology") AND (India)] retrieved 26 articles, of 
which 4 articles reported both body weight and liver volume29-32. An additional 5 articles were 
obtained through searching Google Scholar33-38.  

 

For adults, the data on age, body weight and liver volume/weight were extracted. The liver 
volume was converted to weight by considering the density of liver39-40 to be 1.05 g/cm3. Some 
studies30,35 did not provide body weights and were not considered further in this ratio calculation. 
The age, gender, body weight and liver weight data from remaining 7 studies were given in Table 
13.1.3.  The mean liver to body weight ratio ranged from 0.0209 to 0.0239 with a mean of 0.023. 
The mean liver to body weight ratio computed from 4 Asian studies41-44, from China (2 studies), 
Korea (1 study) and Singapore (1 study) was 0.021 (Table 13.1.3). Therefore, 0.022, as an average 
of all values was considered as the liver to body weight ratio to calculate liver weight. The CV was 
considered to be 9%45. 

 

261 
 



 

Table 13.1.3: Adult liver/body weight ratios 
 

Indian Studies 

Body 
Sample Average Liver weight Liver/body Study Female/Male 

  weight 
size Age (Kg) wt ratio type ratio 

(Kg) 

Chandramohan et 49 58.7  1.409.51 
1 366 0.0238 Autopsy 91/274 

al., 201230 (18-70) (39-89) (0.79-2.44) 

Chandramohan et 46.5 57.5  1.378  
2 

al., 200729 238 0.0238 CT scan 88/150 
(10-70) (22.7-99.7) (805.2-27) 

Gupta et al., 35.05 54.3 ±9.48 1.140 ±0.244 
3 50 0.0209 Autopsy - 

200836 (19-65) (35-75) (0.800-1.72) 
Vijay et al., 45.2± 57.2 ± 

4 38 33 1.334±0.358 0.0232 Autopsy 14/19 
2013 19.45 12.48 
Anitha et al., 100 39.15 

5 60.27±10.0 1.34±0.23 0.0222 CT scan 50/50 
2019 34  (18-64) 
Sharma et al., 48.33±10.

6 1.45.46±0.36 0.0233 CT scan 38/62 
201637 100 62.06±8.84 

87 

Agrawal et al., 49.34±11.
7 37 63.1±9.77 1.517±0.34 0.239 CT scan 176/161 

201133 3
99 

Average liver/body weight ratio 0.0230 

Asian studies 

8 Yu et al;., 200444 652 42.4±16.5 60.6± 13.3 1.396.0 ±0.37 0.023 Autopsy 222/430 

35.8 ± 
Chan et al., 56.3 ± 8.4 

9 159 10.5  1.153.85±0.19 0.020 CT scan 106/53 
200641 (41.0-78.5) 

(18-57) 
48.8 ± 65.41 ± 

Feng et al., 
10 244 12.00 10.92 1.253±0.25 0.019 CT scan 106/138 

201742 

 (18-88)  (38-96) 
62 [39-

11 Lui et al., 201643 79 34 [22-57] 1.337.7±0.264 0.021 CT scan 38/41 
117] 

Average liver/body weight ratio 0.021 

 

Reference weight (W)  
 

The reference weight taken for adult Indian man and woman are 65 and 55 kg, respectively 
(ICMR-RDA-2020, Chapter 3). The reference weight for girls and boys (1-6y) was taken as the age 
and gender- specific median value of the WHO growth curve weights46. The CV of adult body 
weight was considered to be 14% and similar in children47. 
 

Ratio of total body/liver store (P)  
 

It is known that most of the body stores of total vitamin A (upto 80%) are stored in the liver48, 
as assumed by EFSA. The ratio of total body to liver vitamin A store was taken as 80% (a 
multiplicative factor of 1.25 for the calculated liver store) among individuals with adequate vitamin 
A status. This value was considered as a fixed factor for both adults and children. 
 

Efficiency of storage of ingested vitamin A (Z)  
 

The efficiency of vitamin A storage depends on the pre-existing vitamin A status, 
physiological status and dose administered (dietary intake). Using a radio-isotopic method49, whole-
body retinol retention after 1 mg dose of labelled retinol in Indian children (2–10 years) found to be 
82.2±2.0% and 57.6±6.0%, in healthy and infected children, respectively. However, at higher doses 
of retinol (6 mg), the retention reduced to 47%.  In a subsequent study using similar methodology50, 
retention was found to be 48–54% among healthy Indian children (n=17; 3–6 years). Liver stores of 
vitamin A were not measured in these studies in children where VAD was anticipated, which could 
improve the retention and storage. A study in Bangladesh men with normal vitamin A stores, 

262 
 



 

determined the efficiency of liver storage to be 40%48. However, this study did not account for the 
oxidized metabolites of retinol during the experimental period. Keeping these uncertainties in mind, 
a 50% efficiency of storage is considered in computing the vitamin A requirements of Indian adults 
and children, and is similar to the value used by EFSA. In the Bangladesh study, the CV of 
deposition was 30%, and this was considered for both adults and children. 
 

Statistical considerations in the factorial model  
 

The Olson method (1-3) uses a simple multiplicative model, multiplying all these factors into 
each other. The distribution of the product of all these factors (X × N × Y × Z × W × P), (where 
‘X’,’Y’,’Z’ and ‘W’ are variables that are assumed to be fixed in their value) would produce a 
distribution of the requirement of daily dietary vitamin A to replace daily catabolic loss and 
maintain the vitamin A reserve in the body. However, the use of a simple product method assumes a 
Gaussian distribution of desired requirement, but this may not be true even if all factors derive from 
a Gaussian process.   
 

In general, a wide variation in some of the factors estimates has been reported, with CV 
greater than 10%. The CV of the body weight (W), daily catabolic vitamin A loss (X), liver weight 
proportion of body weight (Y), and the efficiency of deposition into the store (Z) were taken from 
the literature as described for each factor above. The concentration of the liver vitamin A store (N), 
its relation to the total body vitamin A store (P) and the age-based growth factor in children was 
assumed to be constant. 

 

The high factor CV makes it prudent to consider an alternate method for calculating the 
factorial estimate. To do so, the simple multiplicative model is converted into an additive structure 
by log transformation. It is already well known that the standard body weight is skewed as in the 
WHO standards46, and the finding of a CV of 30% for the efficiency of vitamin A storage is also an 
indicator of a skewed distribution for that factor. Keeping these features in mind, it is assumed that 
the distribution of the factors ‘X’, ‘Y’,’Z’ and ‘W’ are symmetric in log scale, and that the average 
values of ‘X’,’Y’,’Z’ and ’W’ for adults are the mean of a mild to moderate skewed distribution. 
However, the average of standard weight46 for children are the median value with the same 
assumption.  

The multiplicative model in log scale will be: 

𝑍𝑅 = log(𝑋) + log(𝑌) + log(𝑍) + log(𝑊) + log⁡(𝑁𝑃) 
 

For simplicity, it is assumed that the probability distribution of ‘X’,’Y’,’Z’ and ‘W’ are 
normal in log scale, hence have Log normal distribution in anti-log scale. Following the features of 
log normal distribution, the mean and SD of the distribution of each factor in log scale can be 
derived by the following expression  

1
𝜇 = log(𝑚) − log(1 + 𝑠2) &⁡⁡𝜎2 = log(1 + 𝑠2) 

2

Where m and s are the mean and CV of the factor reported in the literature. For the weight of 
the children 𝜇 = log⁡(𝑚).  

Finally the mean and variance of the requirement distribution in log scale is 

𝜇𝑅 = 𝐸(𝑍𝑅) = 𝜇𝑥 + 𝜇𝑦 + 𝜇𝑧 + 𝜇𝑤 + log⁡(𝑁𝑃) 

and 

𝜎2𝑅 = 𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑍𝑅) = 𝜎2 2
𝑥 + 𝜎𝑦 + 𝜎2𝑧 + 𝜎2𝑤 

263 
 



 

The EAR and RDA can then be derived from the median and 97.5th percentile of the 
distribution of the dietary requirement of vitamin A, which will be a log normal distribution in the 
above formula.  

 The following are the expressions for EAR and RDA 

𝐸𝐴𝑅 = exp(𝜇𝑅) 

and 

𝑅𝐷𝐴 = exp(𝜇𝑅 + 1.96 × 𝜎𝑅) 

The calculation of the EAR and RDA standardized for the body weight (EAR/Kg body weight 
or RDA/Kg body weight) is performed by removing the body weight factor from the model 
described above.  

Requirements for adult men and women  
 

The derived/ assumed factors for adult men and women are given in Table 3 using the 
assumption of mean or median values for each factor. Using the IOM and EFSA method with mean 
values of factors, the EAR of vitamin A requirement in adult men and women (rounded) are 500 
and 425 respectively. Using the statistically correct assumption of median values method described 
above, the EAR of men and women are (rounded) 460 and 390, respectively. The lower EAR for 
women is due to their lower body weight compared to men. 
 

Pregnancy and Lactation  
 

Vitamin A requirement during pregnancy has been calculated considering the additional 
requirement of 14 µg/day for gestational weight gain. For an adult woman with 55 kg weight, the 
EAR of retinol during pregnancy is 406 µg/day with an RDA of 900 µg/day. 

 

The additional needs during lactation are calculated on the basis of vitamin A secreted in milk. 
Considering the average milk secretion of 700 ml/day with a retinol content of 46.4 µg/100mL, an 
additional EAR is 325 µg/day of retinol with an RDA of 720 µg/day. 
 

Young Children 
  

For children, it is known that the liver to body weight ratio is higher when compared to adults. 
Earlier studies reported that the liver weight increases linearly up to 20 kg of body weight followed 
by flattening thereafter.  Studies in Japanese infants51 reported a liver to body weight ratio of 0.0358 
in <2y children (Table 13.1.4). Further, from a meta-analysis of developmental changes in liver52, 
the mean liver to body weight ratio ranged from 0.0358 to 0.028 among 0-6 year children, with 
average of 0.034.This value was considered for computation of total vitamin A liver stores and its 
average requirement in Indian children aged 1-6y, with a similar CV as in adults. 

 

Growth factors in children  
 

An additional requirement is needed in children to account for the usage of retinol in growth.  
For this, a growth factor, based on the deposition of lean tissue in growing children at 1-3y and 4-6y 
was calculated and multiplied into the factorial estimate, based on tissue accretion rates at those 
ages.  These were taken as a proportion of the protein requirement for growth to the maintenance 
requirement53 at each age group. This was altered for the 3-6y age group, since in the WHO/FAO/ 
UNU report53, protein deposition was calculated across ages from 2 datasets, one longitudinal for 
0.5-2y, and the other cross-sectional for 4-18y. These estimates, made by K counting for protein 
deposition, meant that there were no data for the intervening ages, and also, there was an offset 

264 
 



 

between 2y (from the first dataset) and 4y (from the second). A quadratic equation was used to 
bridge this offset smoothly.  However, using this equation meant that at 3-5y, the estimated protein 
deposition dropped to near zero, which might seem biologically implausible.  Thus, in the EFSA 
and IOM (2, 3) estimates of the EAR, a low growth factor results, and is used at the 3-6y age group. 
In the present calculation, it was felt that an interpolated value for growth deposition should be used 
for the 3-6y age group (interpolated from the values at 1-3y and 6-9y). These were assumed to be 
fixed factors. 

 

Table 13.1.4 Children liver/body weight ratios 
 

Body Liver/body 
Sample Liver weight Study 

  Age weight weight 
size (Kg) type 

(Kg) ratio 
1 Urata  

et al., 26 <2 years 8.0 ± 1.4 0.287± 0.556 0.0358 Autopsy 
199551 

2 Johnson  576 3.4 – 3.75 0.075-0.168 Meta-
Neonates 0.034 

et al.,    analysis 
200552 1518 Infants  4.1 – 10.1 0.129-0.39 

0.037  
 (<1 year)   

Young 
1535 Children 9.65 – 21.9 0.231-0.639 0.028  

(<6 years) 
0.0337 

Average liver/body weight ratio 
(rounded to 0.034) 

 
 

 
Table 13.1.5: Average daily requirement of Vitamin A in boys using reported values of factors 
 

Age group 0.5-1 1-3 3-6 6-9 9-12 12-15 15-18 

Wt (Kg) 9.1 12.3 17.4 24.2 33.0 47.7 63.4 

Liver: body weight ratio 0.034 0.034 0.034 0.031 0.028 0.024 0.022 

Liver store concentration 
20 20 20 20 20 20 20 

(ug/g) 

Daily loss (% TBS*) 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 

TBS:TLR** ratio 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 

Efficiency of storage of 
50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 

intake 

Growth Factor 1.57 1.25 1.19 1.13 1.13 1.09 1.06 

EAR (µg RAE / day) 167 183 242 294 358 433 481 

RDA (µg RAE / day) 352 387 518 632 769 932 1036 

EAR (µg RAE / kg / day) 18 14 13 12 10 9 8 

RDA (µg RAE / kg / day) 36 29 27 24 21 18 16 

*: Total body store 
**: Total body store: Total Liver reserve 

265 
 



 

Table 13.1.6: Average daily requirement of Vitamin A in girls using reported values of factors 
 

 

Age group 0.5-1 1-3 3-6 6-9 9-12 12-15 15-18 

Wt (Kg) 8.4 11.6 17.2 23.8 34.2 48.3 55.4 

Liver: body weight ratio 0.034 0.034 0.034 0.031 0.028 0.024 0.022 

Liver store concentration 
20 20 20 20 20 20 20 

(ug/g) 

Daily loss (% TBS*) 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 

TBS:TLR** ratio 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 

Efficiency of storage of 
50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 

intake 

Growth Factor 1.57 1.25 1.19 1.13 1.11 1.06 1.02 

EAR (µg RAE / day) 154 175 237 290 365 415 401 

RDA (µg RAE / day) 329 372 511 625 785 894 863 

EAR (µg RAE / kg / day) 18 14 13 12 10 9 7 

RDA (µg RAE / kg/day) 36 29 27 24 21 17 15 

*: Total body store 
**: Total body store: Total Liver reserve 
 
 

Table 13.1.7: Summary of EAR and RDA by age group and per kg body weight 
(Rounded off values) 

 

EAR 
RDA EAR RDA 

Age Group (µg 
(µg RAE/day) (µg RAE/kg/day) (µg RAE/kg/day) 

RAE/day) 
Adult Men 460 1000 7 15 
Adult Women 390 840 7 15 
Boys 
0.5-1y 170 350 18 36 
1-3y 180 390 14 29 
3-6y 240 510 13 27 
6-9y 290 630 12 24 
9-12y 360 770 10 21 
12-15y 430 930 9 18 
15-18y 480 1000 8 16 
Girls 
0.5-1y 160 330 18 36 
1-3y 180 370 14 29 
3-6y 240 500 13 27 
6-9y 290 630 12 24 
9-12y 370 790 10 21 
12-15y 420 890 9 17 
15-18y 400 860 7 15 

 

266 
 



 

Requirements in young children (1-6 years) 
 

The derived/ assumed factors for children are similar to that in adult men and women, except 
that a liver to body weight ratio of 0.034 was used for children from 0.5 to 6y of age. For the 15-
18y age group, the liver ratio of body weight was assumed to be the same as in adults. For the in-
between age groups, a linear interpolated value was used. The median value method was used to 
calculate EAR and RDA for each age group, as shown in Tables13.1.5 &13.1.6.   

 

The rounded off EAR and RDA values, also adjusted for weight, for adults and children are 
given in Table 13.1.7. Due to the higher liver weight ratio, and the additional requirement to 
support growth deposition, the EAR and RDA/kg are higher in children. The fact is that the per kg 
body requirement of vitamin A is low with increase of age of the child. Summary and comparison 
with the previous RDA is presented in Table 13.1.8. 

 

Table 13.1.8: Vitamin A daily requirements for various physiological groups and its 
comparison with ICMR RDA 2010 and IOM 2001 

 

RDA 2020 TUL 
Physiological Body weight RDA 2010  H- IOM 

EAR  RDA  (µg 
group (kg) (µg /day) AR RDA 

(µg /day) (µg /day) /day) 

Adult-Male 65 460 1000 600 3000 570 900 

Adult-Female 55 390 840 600 3000 490 700 

Pregnant 55.0+GWG 406 900 800 3000 540 770 

Lactatingπ 55.0 720 950 950 3000 1020 1300 

Infants (0-6 mo) 5.8 -  350* (AI) 350 600$ -  -  

Infants (6-12 mo) 8.5 170 (AI) 350 (AI) 350 600$ 190 - 

Children (1-3y) 11.7 180 390 400 600$ 205 300 

Children (4-6y) 18.3 240 510 (300) 400 900$ 245 400 

Children (7-9y) 25.3 290 630 (350) 600 900$ 320 400 

Boys (10-12y) 34.9 360 770 600 1700 480 600 

Girls (10-12y) 36.4 370 790 600 1700 480 600 

Boys (13-15y) 50.5 430 930 600 2800 480 900 

Girls (13-15y) 49.6 420 890 600 2800 480 700 

Boys (16-18y) 64.4 480 1000 600 2800 580 900 

Girls (16-18y) 55.7 400 860 600 2800 490 700 

RAE: Retinol Equivalents (µg/d); GWG: Gestational weight gain 

* Adequate intake; # Extrapolated from infant and adult values;  $Adopted from IOM;   
H-AR: Harmonized average requirement55  

π Additional EAR required for lactating women: 325 (µg /day) 

267 
 



 

References 

1. Laxmaiah A, Nair MK, Arlappa N, Raghu P, Balakrishna N, Rao KM, Galreddy C, Kumar S, 
Ravindranath M, Rao VV, Brahmam GN. Prevalence of ocular signs and subclinical vitamin A 
deficiency and its determinants among rural pre-school children in India. Public Health Nutrition. 2012 
Apr;15(4):568-77. 

2. Vijayaraghavan K. National control programme against nutritional blindness due to vitamin A 
deficiency: Current status & future strategy. The Indian journal of medical research. 2018 
Nov;148(5):496. 

3. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), GoI., UNICEF and Population Council. 
Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS) National Report. New Delhi. 2019. 

4. Eroglu A, Harrison EH. Carotenoid metabolism in mammals, including man: Formation, occurrence, and 
function of apocarotenoids thematic review series: Fat-soluble vitamins: Vitamin A. Journal of lipid 
research. 2013 Jul 1;54(7):1719-30. 

5. Harrison EH. Mechanisms involved in the intestinal absorption of dietary vitamin A and provitamin A 
carotenoids. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids. 2012 Jan 
1;1821(1):70-7. 

6. Raghu P, Sivakumar B. Interactions amongst plasma retinol-binding protein, transthyretin and their 
ligands: implications in vitamin A homeostasis and transthyretin amyloidosis. Biochimica et Biophysica 
Acta (BBA)-Proteins and Proteomics. 2004 Dec 1;1703(1):1-9. 

7. Russell RM, Beard JL, Cousins RJ, Dunn JT, Ferland G, Hambidge KM, Lynch S, Penland JG, Ross 
AC, Stoecker BJ, Suttie JW. Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K, arsenic, boron, 
chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and zinc. A Report 
of the Panel on Micronutrients, Subcommittees on Upper Reference Levels of Nutrients and of 
Interpretation and Uses of Dietary Reference Intakes, and the Standing Committee on the Scientific 
Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes Food and Nutrition Board Institute of Medicine. 2001. 

8. Haskell MJ. The challenge to reach nutritional adequacy for vitamin A: β-carotene bioavailability and 
conversion—evidence in humans. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2012 Nov 1;96(5):1193S-
203S. 

9. Tang G. Vitamin A value of plant food provitamin A—evaluated by the stable isotope technologies. Int J 
Vitam Nutr Res. 2014 Jan 1;84(Suppl 1):25-9. 

10. CA VL, West CE, Van Breemen RB, Zhu D, Siebelink E, Versloot P, Hulshof PJ, van Lieshout M, 
Russel FG, Schaafsma G, Naber TH. Vitamin A equivalency of beta-carotene in healthy adults: 
limitation of the extrinsic dual-isotope dilution technique to measure matrix effect. The British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2008 Nov 24;101(12):1837-45. 

11. Muzhingi T, Yeum KJ, Bermudez O, Tang G, Siwela AH. Peanut butter increases the bioavailability and 
bioconversion of kale beta-carotene to vitamin A. Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2017;26(6):1039. 

12. Tang G, Qin J, Dolnikowski GG, Russell RM. Short-term (intestinal) and long-term (postintestinal) 
conversion of β-carotene to retinol in adults as assessed by a stable-isotope reference method. The 
American journal of clinical nutrition. 2003 Aug 1;78(2):259-66. 

13. Tang, G, Qin J, Dolnikowski GG, Russell RM,  Grusak MA. Spinach or carrots can supply significant 
amounts of vitamin A as assessed by feeding with intrinsically deuterated vegetables. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition. 2005; 82(4), 821-828. doi:10.1093/ajcn/82.4.821. 

14. Tang G, Hu Y, Yin SA, Wang Y, Dallal GE, Grusak MA, Russell RM. Retracted: β-Carotene in Golden 
Rice is as good as β-carotene in oil at providing vitamin A to children. The American journal of clinical 
nutrition. 2012 Sep 1;96(3):658-64. doi:10.3945/ajcn.111.030775. 

268 
 



 

15. Wang J, Wang Y, Wang Z, Li L, Qin J, Lai W, Fu Y, Suter PM, Russell RM, Grusak MA, Tang G. 
Vitamin A equivalence of spirulina β-carotene in Chinese adults as assessed by using a stable-isotope 
reference method. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2008 Jun 1;87(6):1730-7. doi:10.1093/ 
ajcn/87.6.1730. 

16. Muzhingi T, Gadaga TH, Siwela AH, Grusak MA, Russell RM, Tang G. Yellow maize with high β-
carotene is an effective source of vitamin A in healthy Zimbabwean men. The American journal of 
clinical nutrition. 2011 Aug 1;94(2):510-9. doi:10.3945/ajcn.110.006486. 

17. Shalini T, Sivaprasad M, Balakrishna N, Madhavi G, Radhika MS, Kumar BN, Pullakhandam R, Reddy 
GB. Micronutrient intakes and status assessed by probability approach among the urban adult population 
of Hyderabad city in South India. European journal of nutrition. 2019 Dec 1;58(8):3147-59.    
doi:10.1007/s00394-018-1859-y. 

18. Olson JA. Recommended dietary intakes (RDI) of vitamin A in humans. The American journal of 
clinical nutrition. 1987 Apr 1;45(4):704-16. 

19. Olson JA. (1987). Recommended dietary intakes (RDI) of vitamin A in humans. Am J Clin Nutr, 45(4), 
704-716. doi:10.1093/ajcn/45.4.704 

20. EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition, and Allergies (NDA). Scientific opinion on dietary 
reference values for vitamin A. EFSA Journal. 2015 Mar;13(3):4028. 

21. Olson JA, Gunning D, Tilton R. The distribution of vitamin A in human liver. The American journal of 
clinical nutrition. 1979 Dec 1;32(12):2500-7. doi:10.1093/ajcn/32.12.2500. 

22. Sauberlich HE, Hodges RE, Wallace DL, Kolder H, Canham JE, Hood J, Raica Jr N, Lowry LK. 
Vitamin A metabolism and requirements in the human studied with the use of labeled retinol. InVitamins 
& Hormones 1975 Jan 1 (Vol. 32, pp. 251-275). Academic Press. doi:10.1016/s0083-6729(08)60015-1. 

23. Cifelli CJ, Green JB, Wang Z, Yin S, Russell RM, Tang G, Green MH. Kinetic analysis shows that 
vitamin A disposal rate in humans is positively correlated with vitamin A stores. The Journal of 
nutrition. 2008 May 1;138(5):971-7. doi:10.1093/jn/138.5.971. 

24. Cifelli CJ, Green JB, Green MH. Dietary retinoic acid alters vitamin A kinetics in both the whole body 
and in specific organs of rats with low vitamin A status. The Journal of nutrition. 2005 Apr 
1;135(4):746-52. doi:10.1093/jn/135.4.746. 

25. Hicks VA, Gunning DB, Olson JA. Metabolism, plasma transport and biliary excretion of radioactive 
vitamin A and its metabolites as a function of liver reserves of vitamin A in the rat. The Journal of 
nutrition. 1984 Jul 1;114(7):1327-33. doi:10.1093/jn/114.7.1327. 

26. Loerch JD, Underwood BA, Lewis KC. Response of plasma levels of vitamin A to a dose of vitamin A 
as an indicator of hepatic vitamin A reserves in rats. The Journal of nutrition. 1979 May 1;109(5):778-
86. doi:10.1093/jn/109.5.778. 

27. Tanumihardjo SA, Russell RM, Stephensen CB, Gannon BM, Craft NE, Haskell MJ, Lietz G, Schulze 
K, Raiten DJ. Biomarkers of Nutrition for Development (BOND)-vitamin A review. The Journal of 
Nutrition. 2016;146:1816S–48S. 

28. Tanumihardjo S, Gannon B, Kaliwile C, Chileshe J.  Hypercarotenodermia in Zambia: which children 
turned orange during mango season? European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2015; 69, 1346–1349. 

29. Chandramohan A, Eapen A, Govil S, Govil S, Jeyaseelan V. Determining standard liver volume: 
assessment of existing formulae in Indian population. Indian Journal of Gastroenterology. 2007 Jan 
3;26(1):22.  

30. Chandramohan A, Ramakrishna B, Venkatramani S. Formula for calculating standard liver volume in 
Indians. Indian Journal of Gastroenterology. 2012 Jan 1;31(1):15-9. doi:10.1007/s12664-011-0152-2. 

31. Chaubal G, Borkar VV, Shetty G, Chattopadhyay S, Bahure U, Badhe R, Udare A, Shah S, Gupte P, 
Shukla A, Rela M. Estimation of liver volume in the western Indian population. Indian Journal of 
Gastroenterology. 2016 Jul 1;35(4):274-9. doi:10.1007/s12664-016-0662-z. 

269 
 



 

32. Singh NK, Prasad RC, Chaube HD, Shukla RC, Agarwal AK. The value of sonography for estimation of 
liver volume by using a simple geometric formula ascertained in cadaveric livers. The Journal of the 
Association of Physicians of India. 1998 Jun 1;46(6):521-4. 

33. Agrawal D, Lalwani R, Asghar A, Sahai A, Sharma PK, Singh R. Assessment of liver volume with spiral 
computerized tomography scanning in North Indian Adults. Internet J Radiol. 2011;13(1). 

34. JASpeR A. Liver and Splenic Volumes in the Indian Population: Is There a Single CT Measurement 
Correlate?. Journal of Clinical & Diagnostic Research. 2019 Aug 1;13(8). 

35. Deepika K, Sushma M, Kumar V. Study of the weights of human heart and liver in relation with age, 
gender and body height. IJRMS. 2017;5:3469-73. 

36. G Gupta M, Sodhi L, Yadav TD. Morphology of liver. Indian Journal of Surgery. 2008 Feb 1;70(1):3-7. 
doi:10.1007/s12262-008-0001-4. 

37. Sharma M, Singh A, Goel S, Satani S, Mudgil K. Assessment of liver volume with spiral computerized 
tomography scanning: predicting liver volume by age and height. Int J Res Med Sci. 2016 Jul;4:3020-3. 

38. Vijay K, Naidu CS, Godara R, Rao P, Sharma S, Vijayvergia V. Standard liver volume estimation in 
Indian population: Need for an accurate formula. Indian Journal of Transplantation. 2013 Apr 1;7(2):39-
41.   

39. https://bionumbers.hms.harvard.edu/files/Density%20and%20mass%20of%20each%20organ-tissue.pdf.   

40. Overmoyer BA, McLaren CE, Brittenham GM. Uniformity of liver density and nonheme (storage) iron 
distribution. Archives of pathology & laboratory medicine. 1987 Jun;111(6):549. 

41. Chan SC, Liu CL, Lo CM, Lam BK, Lee EW, Wong Y, Fan ST. Estimating liver weight of adults by 
body weight and gender. World journal of gastroenterology: WJG. 2006 Apr 14;12(14):2217. 
doi:10.3748/wjg.v12.i4.2217 

42. Feng LM, Wang PQ, Yu H, Chen RT, Wang J, Sheng X, Yuan ZL, Shi PM, Xie WF, Zeng X. New 
formula for predicting standard liver volume in Chinese adults. World journal of gastroenterology. 2017 
Jul 21;23(27):4968. doi:10.3748/wjg.v23.i27.4968. 

43. Lui SA, Bonney GK, Kow WC, Iyer SG, Chang SK. Standard Formulae in Predicting Liver Volumes: A 
South East Asian Series of Adult Living Donors. J. Transplant. Technol. Res. 2016;6(1):1-4. 

44. Yu HC, You H, Lee H, Jin ZW, Moon JI, Cho BH. Estimation of standard liver volume for liver 
transplantation in the Korean population. Liver transplantation. 2004 Jun;10(6):779-83. 
doi:10.1002/lt.20188. 

45. Andersen V, Sonne J, Sletting S, Prip A. The volume of the liver in patients correlates to body weight 
and alcohol consumption. Alcohol and Alcoholism. 2000 Sep 1;35(5):531-2. 

46. World Health Organization. WHO child growth standards: length/height-for-age, weight-for-age, 
weight-for-length, weight-for-height and body mass index-for-age: methods and development. World 
Health Organization; 2006. 

47. Adak DK, Gautam RK, Bharati S, Gharami AK, Pal M, Bharati P. Body mass index and chronic energy 
deficiency of adult males of Central Indian populations. Human biology. 2006 Apr;78(2):161-78. 
doi:10.1353/hub.2006.0032. 

48. Furr HC, Amedee-Manesme O, Clifford AJ, Bergen 3rd HR, Jones AD, Anderson DP, Olson JA. 
Vitamin A concentrations in liver determined by isotope dilution assay with tetradeuterated vitamin A 
and by biopsy in generally healthy adult humans. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1989 Apr 
1;49(4):713-6. doi:10.1093/ajcn/49.4.713. 

49. Reddy V, Sivakumar B. Studies on vitamin A absorption in children. Indian pediatrics. 1972 
Jun;9(6):307-10. 

270 
 



 

50. Kusin JA, Reddy V, Sivakumar B. Vitamin E supplements and the absorption of a massive dose of 
vitamin A. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 1974 Aug 1;27(8):774-6. doi:10.1093/ajcn/ 
27.8.774. 

51. Urata K, Kawasaki S, Matsunami H, Hashikura Y, Ikegami T, Ishizone S, Momose Y, Komiyama A, 
Makuuchi M. Calculation of child and adult standard liver volume for liver transplantation. Hepatology. 
1995 May;21(5):1317-21. 

52. Johnson TN, Tucker GT, Tanner MS, Rostami‐Hodjegan A. Changes in liver volume from birth to 
adulthood: a meta‐analysis. Liver transplantation. 2005 Dec;11(12):1481-93. 

53. Joint WHO/FAO/UNU. Re: Expert Consultation on protein and amino acid requirements in human 
nutrition, 2002. World Health Organization. Technical series No- 935. Geneva: WHO; 2007. 

54. Tang G, Qin J, Dolnikowski GG, Russell RM, Grusak MA. Golden Rice is an effective source of 
vitamin A. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2009 Jun 1;89(6):1776-83. doi:10.3945/ajcn. 
2008.27119. 

55. Allen LH, Carriquiry AL, Murphy SP. Perspective: proposed harmonized nutrient reference values for 
populations. Advances in Nutrition. 2020 May 1;11(3):469-83. 

 

271 
 



13.2  VITAMIN D 
 

Vitamin D3 is synthesized in the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol following exposure to 
ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation with wavelength 290 to 320 nm. The level of synthesis in skin is 
influenced by a number of factors including the season of the year, level of air pollution, skin 
pigmentation, latitude, use of sunscreen, type of clothing, and amount of skin exposed. Regions 
northern to 330 latitude have scanty UV-B with a possibility of limited photolytic vitamin D 
synthesis in individuals living in these regions1. Moreover, the synthesis of vitamin D declines with 
increasing age partly due to fall in 7-dehydrocholesterol levels and alterations in skin morphology. 
Body fat composition may also play a role in low levels of circulating vitamin D due to its 
sequestration in the fat tissue. It has been suggested earlier that the de novo synthesis in the skin 
following sun exposure is the major source of vitamin D and its dietary requirement is very small in 
the Indian context. However, with the existing widespread vitamin D deficiency in the country 
which is partly related to the limited effective sun exposure due to indoor sedentary behaviour, 
clothing, air pollution, darker complexion, the role of dietary vitamin D needs to be re-examined. 

 

This is particularly important with increasing recognition of many non-calcitropic health 
promoting effects important for chronic diseases such as diabetes, psoriasis, hypertension, arthritis, 
few neuropsychiatric illnesses, malignancies and CVD, apart from its well known classical 
calcitropic etiological role in the development of rickets (in children) and osteomalacia (in adults)2.   
 

Diet 
Dietary vitamin D can be obtained in two forms: 1. vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) from sources 

such as plants, mushrooms and yeast and 2. vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) from  animal foods such as 
fish and eggs.  Recently published Indian Food composition data based on LC-MS methodology 
show that a number of foods, including cereals and pulses, contain vitamin D2. Vitamin D2 and 
vitamin D3 are respectively metabolized to 25(OH)D2 and 25(OH)D3 and further to 1,25(OH)D2 and 
1,25(OH)D3. Supplementation with vitamin D2 was found to increase the level of 24,25 (OH)D3, 
indicating activation of vitamin D3 catabolic pathway via CYP24A1. In the absence of studies 
measuring the vitamin D2 metabolites along with PTH and calcium homeostasis markers in Indian 
settings with likely substantial intake of vitamin D2, it is difficult to ascertain the contribution of 
dietary sources of vitamin D to the overall status of vitamin D.  

 

Deficiency 
 

Vitamin D deficiency (VDD) leads to abnormal calcium homeostasis resulting in defective 
mineralization of the growing long bones (rickets in children) or a decrease in the mineral content 
of the matrix of the bones (osteomalacia in adults) ending with weakened bones. A poor calcium 
deposition during growth phase and faulty economy in adults lead to osteoporosis wherein vitamin 
D and calcium supplementation is shown to be beneficial. While the rabid forms of bone disease are 
no longer prevalent in children now, growing urbanization, reduced physical activity and low 
exposure to sunlight are believed to contribute to a spurt of VDD as evidenced from low circulating 
vitamin D levels. Emergence of sub-clinical vitamin D deficiency in the country has been reviewed 
by Goswami et al3.  
 

Role 
 

Vitamin D is activated in two series of hydroxylation reactions: first in liver to produce 25 
hydroxy cholecalciferol (25 HCC) and the second in kidney to produce 1, 25 dihydroxy 
cholecalciferol (1, 25 DHCC), an active hormone which mediates intestinal absorption and renal 
tubular resorption of calcium for increasing the availability of calcium. Accumulated evidence over 
the past two decades has demonstrated that the active form i.e. 1, 25 DHCC is synthesized in a 
number of other tissues in the body indicating extra-renal synthesis. The extra-renal formation of 

272 
 



the active hormonal form is known to aid in paracrine and autocrine functions4. The level of 25 
HCC is usually considered as an indicator of vitamin D status. Serum calcium level is maintained in 
a narrow range by the concerted actions of parathyroid hormone (PTH), thyrocalcitonin and vitamin 
D. A drop in calcium intake triggers an elevation in PTH levels which enhances the release of 1, 25 
DHCC so as to increase calcium absorption and maintain serum calcium level. Vitamin D 
deficiency therefore results in alterations in the calcitropic hormones and not always in serum 
calcium. Hypocalcemia induced secondary hyperparathyroidism leads to bone resorption (brittle 
bones), in an attempt to maintain calcium homeostasis. Vitamin D induced calcium absorption from 
kidneys and intestine, prevents bone resorption due to secondary hyperparathyroidism. 
 

Requirement 
 

Vitamin D is considered more as a pro-hormone, than as a vitamin. It can be synthesized in 
the body by exposure to sunlight. The duration of sun exposure for adequate synthesis of vitamin D 
varies with the latitude, season of the year, time of exposure during the day and amount of skin 
exposed. The UV-B rays from sunlight responsible for vitamin D synthesis are maximal between 11 
AM – 3 PM. 

 

The requirements of vitamin D have been determined over the years based on the healing 
response in rickets, increased calcium absorption or circulating levels of 25 HCC and also turnover 
of isotopic vitamin D. The WHO Expert Committee recommended 100 International Units (IU) (2.5 
µg) /d for adult males in 19885 which was increased later in 2004 to 200 Units (5 µg)/d6. The 
Institute of Medicine (US) guidelines in 2011 recommend 600 IU for adult males assuming minimal 
sun exposure7. The increased requirement is attributed to progressive decrease in sunlight exposure 
necessitating dietary sources to meet the requirement. Hence, many foods such as milk and 
vegetable oils are subjected to mandatory fortification with vitamin D in many developed countries. 
 

Estimating the vitamin D requirements in Indians is especially complicated due to following 
reasons: 

 

1. Uncertainty about the contribution of sun exposure to overall vitamin D nutrition in Indians 
poses difficulty for estimating the dietary requirement of vitamin D. 
 

2. Due to close interaction between calcium and vitamin D, the requirement of vitamin D 
varies with the dietary calcium intakes, especially for the bone health outcomes. 

 
Moreover, data needed to estimate dietary requirements of vitamin D with associated SD/ CV 

values measured in Indian participants are extremely limited (Annexure 13.2). 
 

RDA comments 
 

Recommendations from high income countries and the international agencies for calcium and 
vitamin D are based on the results of large-scale clinical trials and are intended to ensure sufficient 
levels of nutrients for prevention of chronic diseases. However, populations from many high 
income countries live in conditions where exposure to sunlight is limited and therefore, need to 
obtain substantial amounts of vitamin D from the diets through fortification and  if necessary, by 
supplementation. Despite opportunities for sunlight exposure throughout the year, high prevalence 
of vitamin D deficiency in different population groups including school children8 and adults9 has 
been demonstrated by studies from India.  A preliminary  report of Rege et al10 demonstrated 
gradient in mean 25 HCC levels (ng/ml) in men from rural (25.5), urban slums (16.9) and urban 
middle class (12.20) background in consonance with their expected outdoor activity. ICMR task 
force study at National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad (unpublished) showed that the prevalence 
of vitamin D  deficiency was much higher in high and middle income group men and women 
engaged in mostly sedentary occupations (66.9% and 45.5%, respectively), compared to that in 

273 
 



urban slum dwellers  who were mostly involved in manual labour (4.1%).  Few studies from India 
have, however, reported inadequate vitamin D synthesis despite sunlight exposure11, 12. A study by 
Marwaha et al (2015) included 71 school children (aged 10 – 15 years) from Delhi, who were 
categorised into 2 groups, one with 15% and the other with 30% of body surface area (BSA) 
exposed to sunlight for 30 minutes (11.15 AM– 11.45 AM). After follow up for 4 weeks, during the 
months of April and May, children with 30% of BSA exposure had increase of 4.9±6.2 ng/ml in 
serum 25(OH)D while the group with 15% of BSA exposure exhibited relatively lower rise in 
serum 25(OH)D (3.4±3.2 ng/ml)11. Another study from geographically similar location (Delhi) 
cross sectionally estimated vitamin D levels in 88 outdoor labourers, 32 workers with partial 
outdoor activity and 74 individuals with predominantly indoor activity.  

 
The study found that about 60% of the participants with outdoor activity and 97% of the 

individuals in the other 2 groups had vitamin D insufficiency (serum 25(OH) D <30 ng/dl)12. A 
recent study from Pune which examined sun exposure using UV dosimeters, reported that 1 SED-
UV exposure, which corresponded to more than one hour of midday casual sunlight exposure, was 
sufficient to maintain 25(OH)D concentrations over 20 ng/ml13. In a RCT from Pune in men aged 
40-60 y with vitamin D deficiency at baseline, increased sun exposure for more than an hour daily, 
over a 6-month period significantly increased 25(OH)D levels. Interestingly, although the increase 
in vitamin D levels was lower than that observed with cholecalciferol supplementation, increased 
sun exposure also resulted in a significant reduction in serum total cholesterol14. These findings 
corroborate the results of a meta-analysis based on ten randomized clinical trials on the influence of 
Vitamin D supplementation on plasma lipid profiles, which concluded that Vitamin D 
supplementation could increase LDL-Cholesterol concentrations15. However, the findings of this 
study need to be confirmed with further studies especially the RCTs in different parts of the country 
to estimate the relative contribution of sun exposure to vitamin D status and additional dietary 
requirement of Vitamin D. 
 

Recent study from NIN (unpublished) using satellite data on UV index (after accounting for 
cloud cover) from ten centres across the country, showed that around 20 minutes of direct sun 
exposure at solar noon in summer would be enough for adequate cutaneous synthesis of vitamin D 
assuming 10 % body surface area exposure in individuals with skin type V in almost all regions of 
the country except Srinagar. Data on the North East region is not available. The equivalent duration 
of sun exposure in other seasons is higher with maximum of around 45 minutes in monsoon season. 

 

To summarize, the evidence regarding the adequacy of sun exposure for ensuring vitamin D 
sufficiency is mixed but suggests that ensuring adequate sun exposure during 11 am to 3 pm in all 
seasons is an effective and desirable way of improving vitamin D status. However, the duration of 
required sun exposure varies in relation to urban-rural residence, occupation, socioeconomic status, 
skin tone, pollution etc., and it is unclear what proportion of population would be able to achieve 
the sufficient sun exposure. 
 

Under situations of minimal exposure to sunlight, the following recommendation of a daily 
dietary intake may be considered (Table 13.2.1). It is important to note that these values are valid if 
the dietary calcium intakes are adequate. 

 

  

274 
 



Table 13.2.1: EAR and RDA of vitamin D in case of minimal sun exposure                                  
(only with adequate dietary calcium intake) 

 
Body 

EAR RDA 
 weight 

Unit/day Unit/day 
kg 

Adult Men 65 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Adult Women 55 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Pregnant - 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Lactating - 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Infants (0-6mo) 5.8 - 400 IU (10 μg) AI 
Infants (6-12mo) 8.5 - 400 IU (10 μg) AI 
Children (1-3y) 11.7 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Children (4-6y) 18.3 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Children (7-9y) 25.3 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Boys (10-12y) 34.9 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Girls (10-12y) 36.4 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Boys (13-15y) 50.5 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Girls (13-15y) 49.6 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Boys (16-18y) 64.4 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 
Girls (16-18y) 55.7 400 IU (10 μg) 600 IU (15 μg) 

                 Reference from Institute of medicine7 
 

 
 

  

275 
 



Annexure 1 
 

The following studies could be identified by systematic search of studies on vitamin D intake in 
Indians using PubMed search engine: 

George et al 2014 investigated the median vitamin D consumption among apparently healthy Asian 
- Indians living in Johannesburg and reported  a median dietary intake of  vitamin D as 1·17 (IQR 
0·50–2·11) µg/day with a prevalence of vitamin D deficiency (<30 ng / dl in serum) in 28.6% of the 
Asian-Indian population. The study also describes the sun exposure patterns and seasonal 
variations16. 

Tergistina et al 2014 identified an increased incidence of vitamin D deficiency among preterm 
infants who otherwise were normal at the time of birth following 400 IU/D vitamin D 
supplementation over 6 weeks17. 

Khadgawat et al 2013 study in 10 - 14 year apparently healthy school pupils reported final vitamin 
D levels of 22.87±6.75 ng/dL as compared to baseline levels of 11.42±5.24 ng/dL, following 12 
weeks of 600 IU / D of vitamin D supplementation via fortified milk18.  

Kumar G T et al 2011 observed serum mean vitamin D levels of 55 ng/dl  post 6 months of 
intervention with 1400 IU (35 μg) of vitamin D / week, since birth19.  
 
Puri et al 2008 observed  serum 25(OH)D levels of 31·87 (15·43) nmol/l in 8 - 14 year school girls 
with an average daily dietary consumption of 2·2 (1·5) μg of vitamin D20. 

 
  

276 
 



13.3   VITAMIN E (ALPHA TOCOPHEROL) AND VITAMIN K  
 

 They occur widely in vegetable oils and plant foods and dietary deficiencies of these two 
vitamins are not normally encountered. There are very limited data on vitamin E (α-tocopherol) and 
vitamin K intake as well as requirements. No relevant studies in apparently healthy individuals could 
be identified by systematic search of studies on vitamin E and K intake in Indians using PubMed 
search engine. Available information indicates that blood levels of α-tocopherol among Indians is 
satisfactory21, 22. α-tocopherol content of vegetable oils and invisible fat in cereals and other foods is 
adequate.   
  

 α-tocopherol requirement is related to its protective antioxidant property on essential fatty acid 
content of the diet and the suggested intake is 0.8 mg per g of essential fatty acid (EFA). Vegetable 
oils and invisible fat of cereals and other foods like nuts and vegetables contribute to adequate 
tocopherol content in Indian diets. There is limited information suggesting that Indians have blood α-
tocopherol levels of 0.5 mg/kg/ml which is regarded as satisfactory. α-tocopherol requirements are 
related directly to the levels of essential fatty acids α-linoleic and linolenic acids. The suggested 
requirement of α-tocopherol is 0.8 mg/ g of dietary essential fatty acids. This roughly works out to 8-10 
mg tocopherol /d, depending on the edible oil used. 
  

Vitamin K deficiency is not usually encountered in India. Apart from its role in blood clotting 
mechanism, vitamin K is implicated in chemical modification of bone matrix and its turnover. 
FAO/WHO23 suggested an RDA of 7.5-10 mg α-tocopherol and 55 μg of vitamin K/d for adults. In 
the Indian context, limited database is available on the content of these nutrients in foods. Till more 
information is available on nutrient requirements in Indians and their habitual dietary intake, the 
values suggested by the earlier ICMR Committee and WHO are accepted. The safe intakes of 
different groups may be considered on the basis of uniform energy density / density of PUFA 
energy.   
 
  

277 
 



References 

1. Wacker M and Holick MF. Sunlight and Vitamin D: A global perspective for health. Dermato-
Endocrinology 2013; 5(1), 51–108. 

2.  McLaren DS. VDDD: A global threat to health; Sight and Life Magazine 2006; (3): 6-15. 

3. Goswami R, Mishra SK and Kochupillai N. Prevalence and potential significance of vitamin D 
deficiency in Asian Indians. Indian Journal of Medical Research. 2008; 127: 229-38. 

4. Bouillon R. Extra-Skeletal Effects of Vitamin D. Frontiers in Hormone Research. 2018; 50:72-88. doi: 
10.1159/000486072. 

5.  World Health Organization. Calcium requirements. WHO Technical Report Series No 230, Geneva, 
WHO, 1988. 

6.  Joint FAO/WHO. Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. A report of the joint 
FAO/WHO expert consultation, Annexure 2, Bangkok, Thailand, 21-30 September 1998, Second 
Edition, 2004. 

7. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee to Review Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin D and Calcium; 
Ross AC, Taylor CL, Yaktine AL, et al., editors. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 
2011. 

8.  Sivakumar B, Nair KM, Sreeramulu D, et al. Effect of micronutrient supplement on health and 
nutritional status of school children: biochemical status. Nutrition 2006; 22: Suppl No1, 15S-25S. 

9.  Goswami R, Gupta N, Goswami D, et al. Prevalence and significance of low 25-hydroxyvitamin D 
concentrations in healthy subjects in Delhi. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2000; 72:472–475.  

10. Rege SS, Raut KN, Joglekar CV, Bhat DS, Naik SS, Yajnik CS. Circulating vitamin D3 in rural and 
urban Indian men, Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, India, 38th Annual Meeting, (Abstract: BNM 
6.05), P 78, 2006. 

11. Marwaha, R, Sreenivas V, Talwar D, Yenamandra V, Challa A, Lakshmy R, Sethuraman G. Impact of 
solar ultraviolet B radiation (290-320 nm) on vitamin D synthesis in children with type IV and V skin. 
British Journal of Dermatology. 2015; 173(2):604-6. 

12. Goswami R, Saha S, Sreenivas V, Singh N and Lakshmy R. Vitamin D-binding protein, vitamin D status 
and serum bioavailable 25(OH)D of young Asian Indian males working in outdoor and indoor 
environments. Journal of Bone Mineral Metabolism. 2017; 35:177–184. 

13 Patwardhan VG, Mughal ZM, Chiplonkar SA, Webb AR, Kift R, Khadilkar VV, Padidela R, Khadilkar 
AV. Duration of Casual Sunlight Exposure Necessary for Adequate Vitamin D Status in Indian Men. 
Indian Journal of Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2018; 22(2):249-255. 

14. Patwardhan VG, Mughal ZM, Padidela R, Chiplonkar SA, Khadilkar VV, Khadilkar AV. Randomized 
Control Trial Assessing Impact of Increased Sunlight Exposure versus Vitamin D Supplementation on 
Lipid Profile in Indian Vitamin D Deficient Men. Indian Journal Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2017; 
21(3):393-398. 

15. Wang H, Xia N, Yang Y, Peng DQ. Influence of Vitamin D supplementation on plasma lipid profiles: A 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Lipids Health Dis. 2012; 11:42. 

16. George JA, Norris SA, van Deventer HE, Pettifor JM, Crowther NJ. Effect of adiposity, season, diet and 
calcium or vitamin D supplementation on the vitamin D status of healthy urban African and Asian-
Indian adults. British Journal of Nutrition. 2014;112:590-9. 

17. Tergestina M, Jose A, Sridhar S, Job V, Rebekah G, Kuruvilla KA, Thomas N. Vitamin D status and 
adequacy of standard supplementation in preterm neonates from South India. 
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition. 2014; 58(5):661-5. 

278 
 



18. Khadgawat R, Marwaha RK, Garg MK, Ramot R, Oberoi AK, Sreenivas V, Gahlot M, Mehan N, Mathur 
P, Gupta N. Impact of vitamin D fortified milk supplementation on vitamin D status of healthy school 
children aged 10–14 years. Osteoporosis International. 2013 Aug 1; 24(8):2335-43. 

19. Kumar GT, Sachdev HS, Chellani H, Rehman AM, Singh V, Arora H, Filteau S. Effect of weekly 
vitamin D supplements on mortality, morbidity, and growth of low birth weight term infants in India up 
to age 6 months: randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2011; 342:d2975. 

20. Puri S, Marwaha RK, Agarwal N, Tandon N, Agarwal R, Grewal K, Reddy DH, Singh S. Vitamin D 
status of apparently healthy schoolgirls from two different socioeconomic strata in Delhi: relation to 
nutrition and lifestyle. British Journal of Nutrition. 2008; 99(4):876-82. 

21. Jagadeesan V, Reddy V. Interrelationship between vitamins E and A: a clinical study. Clinica Chimica 
Acta. 1978 Nov 15; 90(1):71-4. 

22. Jagadeesan V and Prema K. Plasma tocopherol and lipid levels in pregnancy and oral contraceptive 
users. British Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 1980; 87: 903-907. 

23. Joint FAO/WHO. Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition. A report of the joint FAO/WHO 
expert consultation, Bangkok, Thailand, 21-30 September 1998, Second Edition, 2004. 

 

 

279 
 



14.  WATER  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 

 Water is biologically important and has a major role in metabolism. Water is essential for 
various metabolic activities such as transportation of nutrients and oxygen to cells, maintenance of 
blood volume, functioning of the cardiovascular and digestive systems, regulation of body 
temperature, maintenance of acid-base balance, elimination of toxins, lubrication of skin and 
tissues, maintenance of elasticity of tissues and muscles, cell shape and structural integrity, boosting 
energy metabolism, reduction of arterial pressure, hydration of brain cells and thereby, maintaining 
better cognitive function.  
 

Total Body Water (TBW) 
 

Human body contains approximately 60% of body water, if we consider, a 70 kg healthy man, 
TBW would be approximately 42 litres and varies with age, gender, body size and composition. 
Distribution of water in various body tissues and organs by weight ranges from 10% to 95%, 
wherein, 10% is found in adipose tissue, 25% in bone, 75% in skin, 75% in muscles, 80% in brain, 
85% in lungs, 83% in kidneys, 94% in blood and 95% in eyes1-2.  

 

Males have a higher TBW (43-75%) than females (41-63%) due to their higher proportion of 
muscle mass and lower body fat mass. Elderly (39-67%), consequent to the aging process have a 
lower TBW than children (49-75%) and new born (64-84%)3. Athletes have a higher TBW due to 
the higher fat-free mass, lower body fat, and higher skeletal muscle glycogen levels than non-
athletes. Glycogen present in the skeletal muscle increases the water content of fat-free tissue to 
regulate osmotic pressure exerted by glycogen granules within the muscle sarcoplasm. 

 

Total body water (TBW) is mainly distributed between extracellular fluid (ECF) and 
intracellular fluid (ICF). In adults, the ECF contributes to 1/3 or 33 % of TBW (Approx. 14 litres) 
and the ICF contributes to 2/3 or 67% of TBW (Approx. 28 litres). Whereas, in neonates the ICF 
contributes to 1/3 or 33 % of TBW and the ECF contributes to 2/3 or 66 % of TBW. ECF is further 
divided into the interstitial fluid (ISF) and the intravascular fluid (blood plasma and lymph). The 
ISF contains 2/3 of ECF or 25% of TBW (Approx. 11 litres) and the IVF contains 1/3 of ECF or 
8% of TBW (Approx. 3 litres). The ISF provides the medium for the passage of nutrients and 
metabolic products from cells to plasma and plasma to cells. IVF represents the fluid portion of the 
blood. The cell membranes separate IVF and ICF and blood vessels separate the interstitial fluid 
and the plasma. Another compartment of fluids in the ECF is transcellular fluid (TCF) which 
includes cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, liquids secreted to the gastrointestinal tract (digestive 
juices), fluids in pleural, peritoneal and pericardial cavity. TCF is normally not accounted as it is a 
fraction of the extracellular fluid i.e., 2.5% of TBW (1 to 2 litres).  
 

Composition of Body Fluids 
 

Electrolytes: Electrolyte is a scientific term for salts, specifically electrically charged ion, which 
moves to either a positive (cathode) or negative (anode) electrode. A wide range of electrolytes and 
solutes are dissolved in ICF and ECF in varying amounts, that play an important role in maintaining 
membrane potential of cells and carry electrical impulses across the cells in the body. The major 
electrolytes present in the body are Sodium (Na+), Potassium (K+), Chloride (Cl-), Calcium (Ca++), 
Magnesium (Mg++), Bicarbonate (HCO -

3 ), Phosphate (PO 2-
4 ), Sulphate (SO4 

2-) and Organic Acids.  
It is critical for the body to maintain electrolyte homeostasis, in order to maintain the cell 
membrane potential, osmolarity of body fluids, and body water distribution. The presence of 
primary cation sodium and anions chloride, and bicarbonates in the ECF contributes to its 

280 
 



osmolarity and ECF volume. The cations potassium and magnesium, and anions proteins contribute 
to ICF osmolarity. Thus, the presence of electrically balanced solutes in the ICF and ECF 
contributes to water balance and osmolarity. If the electrolyte concentration in the ICF is greater 
(hypertonic) than the ECF, water is moved inside the cell freely and if the electrolytes are low 
(hypotonic), water is moved from the cell. Water movement between extracellular and intracellular 
water compartments is dependent on osmotic, hydrostatic and oncotic pressures3-4. 
 

Regulation of Water and Electrolyte Balance  
 

Several hormones such as angiotensin, aldosterone, vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone or 
arginine vasopressin), renin and natriuretic peptides influence the renal system to correct the fluid 
and electrolyte imbalances. The major regulatory factor in controlling sodium levels in the body is 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). When blood pressure or plasma volume is low, the 
granular cells in the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidneys are innervated by the sympathetic 
nervous system to release renin, which hydrolyse angiotensinogen (inactive protein synthesized in 
the liver) to angiotensin-I. Angiotensin-I is subsequently hydrolysed to angiotensin-II by 
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) which is present in the capillaries of the lungs. Angiotensin-
II increases blood pressure by vasoconstriction of arteries, stimulating thirst centre in the 
hypothalamus, vasopressin release by kidneys to reabsorb water by the kidneys and reducing 
glomerular filtration, aldosterone secretion by adrenal cortex to reabsorb fluid and sodium through 
kidneys and increased potassium and hydrogen ions excretion through urine5-6. 
 

Natriuretic peptide (ANP), a peptide hormone synthesized in the atrial cells of the heart and 
B- type natriuretic hormone (BNP), a peptide hormone synthesized by myocytes in the ventricles of 
the heart have opposing effects to RAAS. When plasma volume is expanded, the ANP and BNP are 
released into the circulation to increase glomerular pressure and filtration rate to promote loss of 
sodium and lower blood volume and pressure.  
 

Thermoregulation  
 

Maintenance of optimum hydration status is critical to regulate the body temperature. Body 
temperature is maintained by controlling the rate of heat production from basal metabolic rate, 
muscular activities, hormones, thermic effect of food, environment and rate of heat loss through 
radiation, conduction, convection and evaporation. The temperature control centre in the 
hypothalamus initiate an increase in heat production when body temperature falls and an increase in 
heat loss when body temperature rises. Heat loss through sweat, is an important cooling mechanism 
in normal conditions as well as in hot climates and in physical activity. Sweat losses if not 
compensated with fluid intake, can lead to a hypo-hydrated state, with concomitant increases in 
core body temperature. The magnitude of core temperature elevation ranged from 0.1°C to 0.23°C 
for every per cent body weight loss. Sweat production is dependent upon age, gender, physical 
activity, fitness levels, body composition, hydration status, acclimatization, environmental 
temperature and humidity, and the type of clothing worn. The combination of impaired 
thermoregulation and environmental heat stress can lead to heat related disorders such as heat 
cramps, heat exhaustion and heat stroke7-8.  

 

Heat storage will be calculated before and during (at every chance of rest) exercise using the 
formula of Adams et al. (1992)9. 

Heat storage = 0.965mΔTb/AD 
 

Where, 0.965 is the specific heat storage capacity of the body (W.kg-1oC-1), m is the mean 
body mass (kg), AD is the body surface area (m2). 

 

Body Surface Area (BSA)10 = (W 0.425 x H 0.725) x 0.007184  
 

281 
 



Consequences of Over or Hyperhydration 
 

Excess intake of fluid or decreased body’s ability to excrete water or increased tendency to 
retain water by the body leads to overhydration. It is generally observed in disease conditions such 
as kidney disorders, liver diseases, congestive heart failure and hormonal imbalance. Under normal 
conditions, over hydration is not dangerous, however, in clinical conditions, it can be fatal. Over or 
hyper hydration reduces the concentration of sodium in the body and results in hyponatremia, this 
in turn leads to muscle cramps and weakness12.  

 

However, certain degree of hyperhydration before the event is recommended among athletes 
participating in long duration events such as distance running, cycling and rowing to improve the 
exercise performance or heat tolerance by lowering the body’s core temperature.  
 

Assessment of Hydration Status 
 

Hydration can be measured using many techniques such as dilution technique, neutron 
activation analysis, bioelectrical impedance, saliva, urine, tears, serum/plasma indices, body mass 
changes, temperature and heat storage and perceptual indicators, but, each technique has its own 
pros and cons with regard to administration, cost, accuracy and reliability. It is required to 
determine the most accurate, realistic, convenient, and cost effective method for measuring 
hydration status depending on the degree of accuracy and facilities available. 
 

Water Balance 
 

Body water balance depends on the net difference between water gain and water loss. Water 
gain occurs from consumption of food and fluids and metabolic water production, while, water 
losses occur from renal, respiratory and skin surface. 
 

Total Daily Water Losses 
 

Majority of fluid is excreted via kidneys as urine and smaller amounts are excreted in the 
feces. Water losses occur via insensible losses such as respiratory tract and skin surface. 
Approximately 1 to 2 litres of water is lost through urine (60%), 50 to 200 ml through faeces (4%), 
and 250 to 350 ml through insensible losses such as evaporation from the lungs during exhalation 
(12%) and 600 ml (24%) through sweat and nonsweat diffusion from the skin. The water loss 
through urine depends on water intake, type of macronutrient consumed, and the amount of sodium. 
The loss of water through faeces depends on the amount of dietary fibre in the stool. The minimum 
urine output is approximately 500 ml/day and the maximum up to 20 L/day during diuretic 
condition. In dehydrated state, the output can be less than 500 ml/day. Exercise and heat strain will 
reduce urine output by 20 to 60 per cent, while cold and hypoxia will increase urine output.  

 

 The amount of insensible water loss through lungs is dependent on  pprox. or volume and 
water vapour pressure gradient. Ventilatory volume is increased by physical activity, hypoxia, and 
hypercapnia, whereas the water vapour pressure is modified by the ambient temperature, humidity, 
and barometric pressure. The respiratory water loss is greatly influenced by physical activity than 
the environmental conditions. In sedentary people, respiratory water loss is approximately 250 to 
350 ml/day, where as in active people, it may range from 500 to 600 ml/day. Exposure to high 
altitude may further increase respiratory water losses by 200 ml/day. 
 

 Respiratory water loss can be predicted from the equation given by Hoyt and Honig, 199613. 
 

Respiratory water loss y (mL/ day) = 0.107x + 92.2. 
Where, x= metabolic rate (kcal/day) 

 

282 
 



 Insensible non sweat losses of water from the skin is approximately 450 ml/day, and sensible 
dermal losses may range from 100 ml to 1000 ml. Water loss through sweat depends on the 
metabolic rate, duration and intensity of physical activity and environmental factors such as 
temperature, humidity, wind, radiation, type of clothing. Exercise in hot and less humid conditions 
can increase insensible water loss through lungs by 120 to 300 mL/day. In cold and less humid 
conditions, water losses at rest and heavy exercise can be approximately 5ml / hr and 15 to 45 
ml/hr. At higher altitude levels, the losses can reach up to 250 ml/day above the base line. In armed 
forces (8 hours of rest, 12 hours of moderate activity, and 4 hours of moderate-heavy activity), the 
respiratory water losses increase by approximately 340 mL/day  (breathing –20°C versus +25°C 
air)1,2. 
 

Sources of Total Daily Water Intake 
 

Beverages (60-65%) and foods (25-30%) are the major contributors to total fluid 
requirements2. Fluids other than water can be consumed in the form of dishes like rasam, sambar, 
porridges, kanji, soups, broth, tea, coffee, milk, buttermilk, fruit juices, coconut water, sugarcane 
juice and soda etc. Drinking fluids other than water can contribute to an intake of excess amounts of 
calories and other nutrients. Water content of different foods varies at a range of 10-95%. Water 
content of cereals, millets, nuts and oil seeds is less (5-14%) than fruits and vegetables (70-96%) 
milk and milk products (80-85%). The minor contributor to total fluid requirements is metabolic 
water (water produced during biochemical reactions) with a contribution of 10% to total fluid 
requirements. Daily metabolic water generation is about 200-300 ml depending on the 
macronutrient oxidation where 100 gm of each nutrient such as fats, carbohydrate and protein 
generates 110 ml, 55 ml and 41 ml of water2,14. In case of athletes’, the metabolic water production 
is high and may increase up to 500- 600 ml/day due to high oxidation of macronutrients15.  
 

Water Requirement by Life Stage and Gender  
 

 Water requirement can be met from foods and fluids and the requirement varies based on age, 
gender, body size and composition, type of food, environment, and rate of metabolism, clothing 
type, and duration and intensity of physical activity. There are various approaches being adopted to 
estimate fluid requirements, however, the precise prediction of water requirements is impossible, 
except under controlled conditions1,2. In India, so far no scientific research has been carried out and 
hence, there are no records available on adequate intake of water across various age-groups. To 
formulate age and gender specific water intake guidelines for Indians, recommendations given by 
World Health Organization (2005)16 have been adapted. The Food and Nutrition Board (FNB), a 
part of the National Research Council, was established in 1940, recommended 1-1.5 ml of fluid for 
each calorie ingested and further suggested additional fluid requirements depending on variation in 
physical activity level, heat stress, sweat losses and solute load.   
 

Considering the lack of water balance studies among Indian population, the total water 
requirement across life stages was calculated using a factorial approach. It is based on the energy 
requirement (Estimated Average Ratio, 2020) and the WHO guidelines of 1.5 ml for each calorie 
ingested16. The water gained while consuming food and during metabolism was subtracted from the 
total water requirement in order to arrive at the water required from beverages, represented as ml 
per kg body weight, and the detailed rationale is provided under Table 14.1 – 14.4.  
 

Infants    Total Water Requirement 
0–6 months   0.6 L/day (from breast milk or formula) 
7–12 months  1.0 L/day (from breast milk or formula, food, plain water and other 

beverages)   
 

283 
 



Rationale: Infants (0- 6 months) on exclusive breast milk do not require supplemental water and 
their requirement was calculated based on the average consumption of breast milk by Indian Infant 
(around 700 ml), corrected for the water content in breast milk (considering 88% in 100 ml)17. The 
total water requirement of Indian infants aged 7–12 months was calculated based on the estimated 
energy requirement (refer “Summary of EAR for Indians 2020”), multiplied with the amount of 
fluids recommended for each calorie (1.5 ml/cal) by WHO16 which amounts to 1 litre per day. 
Considering that the average intake of water from breast milk is around 530 ml/day (for an average 
of 600 ml of partial breast feeding), the remaining 470 ml/day (Approx. 0.5L) of water should be 
taken from complementary foods and fluids. Note that the total water requirements are rounded to 
the nearest 50. 

Table 14.1: Water requirement for Children and Adolescents 
 

Water 
Water Water 

Body Energy  Total Water Requirement 
Age from 

irement* from 
Weight Requirement Requ from 

Group Food* Beverages 
(Kg) (Kcal) (ml) Beverages 

(ml) (ml) 
(ml/Kg BW) 

Children 

1-3 y 11.7 1010 1500 700 800 68 

4-6 y 18.3 1360 2050 850 1200 66 

7-9 y 25.3 1700 2550 1000 1550 61 

Boys 

10-12 y 34.9 2220 3300 1200 2100 60 

13-15 y 50.5 2860 4200 1300 2900 57 

16-18 y 64.4 3320 4500 1500 3000 47 

Girls 

10-12 y 36.4 2060 3050 1250 1800 49 

13-15 y 49.6 2400 3500 1550 1950 39 

16-18 y 55.7 2500 3700 1350 2350 42 

Adult Man 

Sedentary 65.0 2110 3150 1100 2050 32 

Moderate 65.0 2710 4050 1250 2800 43 

Heavy 65.0 3470 5200 1450 3750 58 

Adult Woman 

Sedentary 55.0 1660 2500 1000 1500 27 

Moderate 55.0 2130 3200 1100 2100 38 

Heavy 55.0 2720 4100 1250 2850 52 

Pregnant  55.0+GWGa +350 3700 1100 2600 - 

Lactating  55.0+b +600 4100 1250 2850 - 
 

*Values are rounded off to the nearest 50. BW=Body Weight 
a Gestational weight gain; b Gestational weight gain remaining after delivery 
 

284 
 



Rationale: The Total Water Requirement was calculated based on the Estimated Energy 
Requirement for Adult Man, Woman, adolescents and children (Represented in the Table 14.1 
depicting “Summary of EAR for Indians 2020”) multiplied with the amount of fluid recommended 
per kilocalorie (1.5 ml/kcal)16. To arrive at the water from food, the total water gained (metabolic 
water and the moisture content in food) was estimated. Metabolic water was calculated using the 
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) of macronutrients for Adult Man and Woman (Atwater 
general factor system was used for conversion of macronutrients in grams to calories, wherever 
applicable), multiplied with the water generated/gained during macronutrient oxidation (i.e. 100 
grams of carbohydrate, protein and fat providing 55 ml, 41 ml and 110 ml of water, 
respectively)2,14. The moisture content of food was estimated based on the age-specific 
recommended food group consumption of Sedentary and Moderate Adult Man (Appendix 1 and 2); 
For Heavy Man and Woman the Dietary Guidelines for Indian was used17, multiplied with the 
average per cent moisture content for cereals (10%), pulses (9%) and commonly consumed/selected 
roots and tubers (80%), green leafy vegetables (85%), other vegetables (89%) and fruits (84%) 
calculated from Indian Food Data Tables (2017)18. Considering that milk is classified under a 
beverage, it has been assumed that at least 250ml of 300ml recommended milk intake (RDA, 2020) 
may be consumed as a beverage and subtracted from the food group “milk and milk products”, to 
arrive at the moisture content from milk products (47%). Note that these calculations have not 
considered water content for animal foods due to lack of consistent data on its recommendations 
across age-groups18. Further, in hot and humid climate, water requirements are higher than the 
recommendations to maintain hydration status. 
 

 The energy and nutrient requirements of a pregnant woman is slightly higher than an adult 
woman because of expanding extracellular fluid space, the needs of the foetus and the amniotic 
fluid. Thus, there is an increased requirement of fluid in pregnancy. Water accounts for 88% of milk 
and the average milk production in the first six months of lactation is 700 ml/day and 7-12 months 
500 ml/day. For production of milk lactating mother requires additional calories, nutrients and 
water. Therefore, the total water requirement was estimated from the estimated energy requirement 
for pregnancy and lactating mother (refer table depicting “Summary of EAR for Indians 2020”) 
multiplied with 1.5 ml of fluid recommended per calorie16. Metabolic water and water content in 
foods was considered as 30%16, due to lack of data on recommended food groups across the various 
categories of work during pregnancy and lactation, in order to obtain the amount of water intake 
from foods. 
 

Table 14.2: Water requirement for elderly persons 
 

Water 
Water Water 

Body Energy Total Water Requirement 
from from 

Group Weight Requirement Requirement* from 
Food* Beverages 

(Kg) (Kcal) (ml) Beverages 
(ml) (ml) 

(ml/kg BW) 
Man 
Sedentary 60 1883 2800 850 1950 33 
Moderate 60 2216 3300 1000 2300 38 
Woman 
Sedentary 55 1706 2550 750 1800 33 
Moderate 55 2007 3000 900 2100 38 

 

*Values are rounded off to the nearest 50. BW= Body Weight 
 

285 
 



Rationale: Water requirements are higher in old age because of decreased thirst mechanisms. To 
maintain normal saliva flow rate, bowel movements, gastric functioning and emptying, metabolic, 
renal, cardiovascular functions and cognition, greater volume of fluids are recommended. To 
calculate the water requirement from beverages and the total water requirement, the ideal body 
mass and energy requirements for elderly were taken from the “Nutrient Requirements and 
Recommended dietary allowances for Indians, 200020” due to unavailability of other recent 
recommendations for Indians. It was estimated by multiplying the energy requirement with 1.5 ml 
of fluid recommended per calorie16. Foods which are high in water content are recommended. 
Metabolic water and water content in foods (fixed as 30% for men and woman)2 were considered to 
obtain the amount of water intake from foods11. 
 

Athletes 
 

Proper hydration should be ensured for an athlete for maintenance of health and improved 
performance21. Therefore, it is very important for an athlete to determine his/her individual fluid 
losses, in order to develop successful rehydration strategies. Adequate amounts of fluids, 
carbohydrates and electrolytes should be consumed before, during and after exercise. A basic plan 
with adjustments for changing environmental conditions and competition stress helps the athlete to 
be proactive in preventing and delaying dehydration and other nutrient related problems. In India, 
majority of the athletes are hypo hydrated due to various reasons such as lack of availability and 
accessibility of water during the practice sessions, ignorance, lack of awareness and knowledge and 
intentional restriction. The fluid recommendations for athletes is given in the Table 14.3. 

 

Table 14.3: Fluid requirement for athletes 
 

Amount of Amount of Carbohydrates, 
Exercise Type of Carbohydrate 

Fluid Required Sodium & Potassium 

Pre Exercise 
CHO: 1-4 g/kg/BW 

2-4 hrs prior 5-7 ml/kg/ BW Moderate GI Foods 
Na: 20-50 mmol/L 

2 hrs prior 3-5 ml/kg/BW* - - 
10- 20 min 200 -300 ml -  
During Exercise 
<45 min CHO and Na: Not Required - 

CHO: Small amounts Single or multiple 
45-75 min 

including mouth rinse transportable carbohydrates 
0.4-0.8 L/hr CHO: 30-60 g/hr;  Na: 20-80 Single or multiple 

1–2.5 hrs  mmol/L;  K: 4-8 mmol/L transportable carbohydrates 

CHO: 90 g/hr;  
Only multiple transportable 

>2.5 -3 hrs Na: 20-80 mmol/L;  
carbohydrates 

K: 4-8 mmol/L 
Post Exercise  

CHO:1-1.5g  kg/BW for first 
1.25 -1.5 L/kg 

<1 hr 30 min, and again every 2 Moderate to High  GI foods 
body weight lost 

hours for 4-6 hours 
 

Source: Sawka et al. (2007)22. American College Sports Medicine Position Statement. 
 *if athlete is not hydrated.  

 
Athletes can choose from a variety of fluids and each beverage has its own benefits and 

drawbacks. Water or isotonic solutions are best choices just prior to exercise. During exercise 

286 
 



isotonic carbohydrate and electrolyte drinks are most preferred. Milk, sugarcane juice, sports drinks 
and fruit juices are ideal after an exercise. However, no single strategy is best for all athletes and 
each athlete should find his or her own personalized plan. Coffee and tea are often preferred 
because of the claimed ergogenic effects of caffeine; however, it has diuretic effects. Athlete can 
assess their hydration status using simple Water Urine Thrust (WUT) method; water loss, urine 
colour and thirst. Athlete should consult physician in the case of Extreme Heat Illnesses (EHI) such 
as heat exhaustion, heat stroke and exertional hyponatremia. 

 

Armed Forces 
 

Soldiers are deployed in different climatic conditions such as hot deserts, hot humid jungles, 
snow bound high-altitude areas, underwater (submariners) etc. Fluid and electrolyte imbalances not 
only threaten the health of armed forces but also significantly impair performance and reduce 
combat effectiveness. Fluid requirements of various types of troops under different environmental 
conditions are calculated based on the energy expenditure estimated using indirect calorimetry and 
doubly labelled water. An intake of 1.5 ml was considered per each calorie expended. The 
requirement for sodium chloride is higher than the normal recommendations due to higher sweat 
loss. Approximately 15–16 g of salt normally taken in diet is quite adequate for acclimatized 
soldiers. Acclimatization to the environmental conditions for 3 days decreases the sodium losses 
through sweat23-25. The Fluid requirements are presented in Table 14.4. 

 

Table 14.4: Estimation of Fluid Requirements for Indian Troops based on their Energy 
Expenditure under Different Environments and Training 

 

Total Energy Average Fluid Average Fluid Average Total Fluid 
Type of troops and 

Expenditure Intake from Intake from Requirement 
environment 

(kcal/day) Foods (ml/day) Beverages (ml/day) (ml/day) 
Army 
Sea level- Combat and 

3511 1600 3650 5250 
support 
Desert -Combat and 

3304 1500 3450 4950 
support 
Training centre – Infantry 4670 2100 4900 7000 
Training centre – Support* 3487 1600 3650 5250 
Commando training* 4498 2050 4700 6750 
HA warfare training* 4837 2200 5050 7250 
HA(2,700–4,500m)-

3880 1750 4050 5800 
Combat and support 
HA (>4,500 m) – Combat 4270 1900 4500 6400 
Navy 
Ground crew 2900 1300 3050 4350 
Officers 3615 1600 3800 5400 
Air force 
Ship crew 3313 1500 3450 4950 
Submariners 3168 1450 3300 4750 
MARCOs and divers 4055 1850 4250 6100 

 

Source: Total energy expenditure determined from Malhotra et al. (1975)23 ; Force DotAaA (2003)24; Singh 
et al. (2014)25 

 

HA- High altitude; Energy expenditure measured using oxygen consumption and *indicates where DLW 
method was used22. The energy expenditure and/or energy requirement was multiplied with 1.5 ml/kcal for 
estimation of total fluid requirements. Metabolic water and water content in foods (fixed as 30%)2 were 
considered to obtain the amount of water intake from foods. Values were rounded to the nearest 50. 

 
 

287 
 



The guidelines provided by Force DotAaA (2003)24 and Luippold et al (2018)26 also can be 
adapted to recommend water intake during work by armed forces. Fluid recommendations were 
given based on the type of work involved, uniform configurations and work and rest cycles to 
maintain fluid and thermoregulation under five designated flag conditions (presented in Table 14.5). 
Military work was divided into easy, moderate and hard work; easy work involves weapon 
maintenance, walking on hard surface at 2.5 mph, <30 pound (lb) load, manual of arms 
marksmanship training, drill and ceremony; moderate work involves walking on loose sand at 2.5 
mph, no load, walking hard surface at 3.5 mph, <40lb load, calisthenics, patrolling, individual 
movement techniques, defensive position construction; heavy work involves walking on hard 
surface at 3.5 mph, > or equal to 40 lb load  and walking loose sand at 2.5 mph with load.  
 
Table 14.5: Fluid Replacement and Work/Rest Guidance for Warm Weather Training 
Conditions and Refill Frequency for 3L Collapsible Drink System28,30 

 

Hard Work 
Easy work Moderate Work 

WBGT  
Heat 

Index Work: Water Refilling Work: Water Refilling Work: Water Refilling 
Category 

(0F) Rest Intake Frequency Rest Intake Frequency Rest Intake Frequency 
(min) (ml/hr) (hr) (min) (ml/hr) (hr) (min) (ml/hr) (hr) 

1 (White) 78-81.9 NL 475 4 NL 710 4 40:20 710 4 

2 (Green) 82-84.9 NL 475 4 50:10 710 4 30:30 950 3 

3 (Yellow) 85-87.9 NL 710 4 40:20 710 4 30:30 950 3 

4 (Red) 88-89.9 NL 710 4 30:30 710 4 20:40 950 3 

5 (Black) >90 50:10 950 3 20:40 950 3 10:50 950 3 

 

Source for classification of Heat Category: Institute of Medicine, 20052 and WHO, 200416 

*NL- No limit for work; WBGT- Wet-Bulb Globe Temperature; Rest- Minimal physical activity like sitting 
or standing in the shade. 

 
Recommended fluid requirements and work: rest times will sustain performance and 

hydration for at least 4h of work in the specified heat category. Fluid requirements can vary based 
on individual differences (±240 ml/h) and exposure to full sun or full shade (±240 ml/h). If NBC 
(Nuclear, Biological, Chemical) clothing is worn  (mission-oriented protective posture (MOPP 4)), 
then 10°F should be added to WBGT index for easy work, and 20°F should be added to WBGT 
index for moderate and hard work. The guidelines are viable for use with modern uniform 
configurations in primarily mild flag conditions.  
 

288 
 



References 

1. Institute of Medicine (US). Panel on Dietary Reference Intakes for Electrolytes, Water. DRI, dietary 
reference intakes for water, potassium, sodium, chloride, and sulfate. National Academy Press; 2005. 

2. Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 2005. https://doi.org/10.17226/10925. 

3. Altman PL, Katz DD, editors. Blood and other body fluids. Federation of American Societies for 
Experimental Biology. 

4. Barry MP, Kristen ED, Irwin HR. Water hydration and health. Nutrition reviews. 2010; 68(8):439-58. 
doi:10.1111/j.1753-4887.2010.00304.x. 

5. Convertino VA, Armstrong LE, Coyle EF, Mack GW, Sawka MN, Senay Jr LC, Sherman WM. 
American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid replacement. Medicine and 
science in sports and exercise. 1996 Jan 1; 28(1):i-vii.  

6. Ganong, W.F. Review of Medical Physiology. 22nd edition, McGraw, Hill, New York. 2005. 

7. Douglas J. C. Exercise in the Heat. I. Fundamentals of Thermal Physiology, Performance Implications, 
and Dehydration. Journal of Athletic Training. 1999; 34(3):246-252. 

8. Hosseinlou A, Khamnei S, Zamanlu M. The effect of water temperature and voluntary drinking on the 
post rehydration sweating. International journal of clinical and experimental medicine. 2013; 6(8):683. 

9. Adams WC, Mack GW, Langhans GW, Nadel ER. Effects of varied air velocity on sweating and 
evaporative rates during exercise. Journal of Applied Physiology. 1992 Dec 1; 73(6):2668-74. 

10. Dubois D and Dubois EF. A formula to estimate the approximate surface area if height and weight be 
known. Archives of Internal Medicine. 1916; 17:863-871. 

11. Sansevero, A.C. Dehydration in the elderly: strategies for prevention and management. Nurse Practices. 
1997; 22:41–2:51–7:63–72. 

12. Meyer F, Bar-Or O, Salsberg A, Passe D. Hypohydration during exercise in children: effect on thirst, 
drink preferences, and rehydration. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism. 
1994 Mar 1; 4(1):22-35. 

13. Hoyt RW, Honig A. Energy and macronutrient requirements for work at high altitudes. Nutritional 
Needs in Cold and High-Altitude Environments: Applications for Military Personnel in Field Operations. 
1996 May 16:379. 

14. Mellanby, Kenneth. Metabolic water and desiccation. Nature. 1942; 150.3792: 21-21. 

15. Bamji MS, Krishnaswamy K, Brahmam GN, editors. Textbook of human nutrition. Oxford & IBH; 
2016. 

16. Organisation mondiale de la santé, WHO--Work programme, Światowa Organizacja Zdrowia, World 
Health Organization, World Health Organisation Staff. Guidelines for drinking-water quality. World 
Health Organization; 2004 Aug 31. 

17. Lawrence RA, Lawrence RM. Breastfeeding e-book: a guide for the medical professional. Elsevier 
Health Sciences; 2010 Sep 30. 

18. Manual A. Dietary guidelines for Indians. National Institute of Nutrition. 2011; 2:89-117. 

19. Longvah T, An̲antan̲ R, Bhaskarachary K, Venkaiah K, Longvah T. Indian food composition tables. 
Hyderabad: National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research; 2017. 

20. Nutrient Requirements and Recommended Dietary Allowances for Indian, 2020. A report of the Expert 
Group. The Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi 110 029. 

21. Potgieter S. Sport nutrition: A review of the latest guidelines for exercise and sport nutrition from the 
American College of Sport Nutrition, the International Olympic Committee and the International Society 
for Sports Nutrition. South African journal of clinical nutrition. 2013 Jan 1; 26(1):6-16. 

289 
 



22. Sawka MN, Burke LM, Eichner ER, Maughan RJ, Montain SJ, Stachenfeld NS. American College of 
Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid replacement. Medicine and science in sports and 
exercise. 2007 Feb 1; 39(2):377-90.  

23. Malhotra MS, Chandra U, Rai RM, Venkataswamy Y, Sridharan K. Food intake and energy expenditure 
of Indian troops in training. British Journal of Nutrition. 1976 Mar; 35(2):229-44. 

24. Force DotAaA: Heat stress control and heat casualty management. Departments of the Army and Air 
Force Technical Bulletin Medical 507. Air Force Pam, 48–152(I). 2003. 

25. Singh SN. Determining Nutritional Requirements of Indian Soldiers: An Outcome of Translational 
Research. In Translational Research in Environmental and Occupational Stress 2014 (pp. 109-116). 
Springer, New Delhi.  

26. Luippold AJ, Charkoudian N, Kenefick RW, Montain SJ, Lee JK, Teo YS, Cheuvront SN. Update: 
efficacy of military fluid intake guidance. Military medicine. 2018 Sep 1; 183(9-10):e338-42. 

 

 

290 
 



15. ANTI-OXIDANTS 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 

 Antioxidants (AO) are substances which are both nutrients, viz. vitamins E, C, -carotene, 
selenium etc; and non-nutrients, viz. plant phenols, flavonoids, coumarins, benzyl isothiocyanates, 
caffeic, ferrulic, gallic and ellagic acids, some enzymes like SOD, catalase superoxides mutase. 
These antioxidants reduce the adverse effects of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitrogen 
species, which are generated during physiological or pathological conditions and cause extensive 
oxidative damage.  Literature is replete with evidence that ageing and several diet/nutrient related 
chronic disorders are due to chronic exposure to ROS.  While it is well established that vegetables 
and fruits, legumes and spices and some beverages such as tea and wine are excellent sources of 
AO, scientific evidence for their protective role is available only for vegetables and fruits in several 
chronic disorders1,2.  None of the randomized clinical trials conducted so far with nutrient AO 
supplements have demonstrated a significant benefit in community trials barring one or two major 
trials in high-risk populations. Unfortunately, the term “antioxidant” is widely misused, for just 
about any molecule that can act as an antioxidant with an appropriate oxidizable substrate. Indeed, 
most antioxidants can become prooxidants under certain cellular circumstances; for instance, α-
tocopherol (the most active form of vitamin E), can be pro-oxidant and initiate tocopherol-mediated 
peroxidation. Also, electron transfer to antioxidants can generate other free radicals that can have 
their own pathophysiological actions3.This chapter reviews the published studies and examines the 
question whether specific recommended dietary allowances for antioxidants could be fixed with 
available evidence.   
 

Basic scientific studies 
 

 Experimental studies have amply indicated that both pro-oxidant and AO have a fundamental 
role in pathogenesis of diseases4.  Reactive oxygen species (ROS) damage the bio-molecules such 
as DNA, protein, carbohydrates and lipids and affect the enzyme processes and genetic machinery. 
The oxidation products of bio-molecules accumulate with age.  ROS can be derived from an 
environmental source also. There are several endogenous and exogenous sources of ROS, which 
play an important role in diseases such as cardiovascular, cancer, cataract, diabetes, neuro-
degenerative disorders and age-related maculopathy. Chronic infections aggravate the damage. 
Further, research in this field has highlighted the mechanistic details about the role of antioxidants 
in mitigating the damage. The phyto-chemicals (non-nutrients) have received considerable attention 
and are called the vitamins of the 21st century. Among the most investigated non-nutritive 
chemopreventors are plant phenols, flavonoids, coumarins, benzyl isothiocynides, caffeic, ferulic, 
gallic and ellagic acids. Polyphenols are more complex and of great diversity in structure, bio-
availability and functions5,6.  Free radicals produced during tissue metabolism and their consequent 
damage are reduced by nutrient antioxidants e.g. Vitamins E, C, -carotene and selenium and non-
nutrients such as polyphenols and flavonols and enzymes such as catalase and super-oxide 
dismutase.  The AO, particularly vitamins E, C, co-enzyme Q and glutathione seem to be working 
in concert by recycling each other.  In vitro studies have generated enough evidence for the 
antioxidant network concept with paucity of information for its validity in vivo particularly in 
relation to functional aspects of disease prevention, control or sustained therapeutic benefits.  
Though animal models of diseases suggest that natural and synthetic antioxidants can prevent 
development of clinical end points and there are correlations between circulating antioxidants and 
dietary intake, and beneficial effects have been demonstrated on surrogate bio-markers, randomized 
double blind control clinical trials have been disappointing7.  

 

291 
 



In healthy subjects, the dietary anti-oxidants from a balanced diet with adequate fruits and 
vegetables ranging from 500-600 g/d will probably be enough to take care of oxidant damage and 
repair cellular and tissue defects. However, certain groups of populations like pre-mature infants, 
smokers, alcoholics, and those exposed to environmental pollutants including carcinogens, 
individuals with chronic infections as well as those engaged in strenuous physical activity and 
geriatric population, are at high risk of oxidant damage.   
 

Clinical trials  
 

  Role of antioxidants in reducing the risk of CVD has been a promising area of research.  
Experimental data does reveal that AO have a significant role to play from LDL oxidation and 
endothelial damage to platelet aggregation and thrombosis. Observational and analytical 
epidemiological studies on clinical end points are positive and the descriptive studies in general 
suggest a link between antioxidant nutriture and CVD.  However, none of the randomized studies 
with enough power have provided the necessary evidence to increase the intake of antioxidants8. 
The Cambridge Heart Antioxidant study provides some support for vitamin E (400-800 mg) 
supplements for decreasing mortality in patients with myocardial infarction9. On the other hand, 
studies on cancer10,11 in smokers where -carotene supplements were given in two separate studies, 
increased risk of cancer and fatal cardiac incidence were noted12. There were no effects on colo-
rectal adenoma or subsequent recurrence of cancers. On the other hand, studies in India and Canada 
on pre-cancerous lesions in oral cavity (vitamin A and -carotene)13,14 and gastric cancer mortality 
in China (selenium, -carotene and zinc) reported regression of lesions and 13% reduction in 
mortality respectively15.  In US, patients with history of basal cell carcinoma intervention with 
selenium decreased only secondary end points such as total cancer mortality and incidence of lung, 
colo-rectal and prostate cancer16.  A study in India with vitamin A, riboflavin, selenium and zinc on 
reverse smokers with pre-neoplastic palatal lesions exhibited a beneficial effect in terms of clinical 
remission17,18. A recent meta-analysis of randomized trial of malignant transformation of oral 
leukoplakia as an outcome with vitamin A and retinoids and mixed tea and -carotene supplements 
did not show any benefit. Even though clinical remission was better, there was a high rate of 
relapse19.  A recent meta-analysis of antioxidant supplements on mortality due to cancer finds that 
they are of no benefit and infact seem to increase overall mortality20. A Cochrane database review 
of well-controlled studies on vitamin-mineral supplements to control age-related mascular 
degeneration (AMD) found a beneficial effect of antioxidants (-carotene, vitamins C and E and 
zinc) on progression to advanced stage. 
 

Although there is a substantial body of evidence that a diet rich in plant foods (particularly 
fruit and vegetables) conveys health benefits, as do high plasma levels of several antioxidant 
nutrients found in these foods, a causal link between lack of antioxidants and disease occurrence or 
between antioxidant administration and disease prevention remains to be established. There is a 
lack of understanding of the mechanisms underpinning the apparent protective effect of plant foods 
and, as yet, no clear picture of which components are effective, and hence no way of predicting 
whether all or just some plant foods are important in this respect. Further evidence is required 
regarding the efficacy, safety and appropriate dosage of antioxidants in relation to chronic disease. 
The most prudent public health advice continues to be to increase consumption of plant foods21. 

 

These studies in general show that subjects at risk may benefit from antioxidant supplements. 
The doses employed are relatively large and the effects may be pharmacological.  It is not possible 
to extrapolate these results to general population to delay or prevent the onset of chronic diseases. 
Further, it is important to remember that antioxidants exert pro-oxidant effect towards other 
molecules under certain circumstances. The only positive statement that can be safely made is that a 
diet containing foods rich in several types of antioxidants helps in delaying ageing, reducing 

292 
 



cancer22, CVD and other disorders23. The totality of scientific evidence from cells to animal models, 
from epidemiology to clinical trials needs to be consistent to formulate the recommended dietary 
allowances for antioxidants. Probably, the nutrient and non-nutrient antioxidants and their 
synergistic effect in food matrix is a cost-effective and sustainable solution. As far as strength of 
association and magnitude of effects are considered, there is enough hope for vegetables and fruits 
for all chronic disorders including neuro-degenerative disorders. Even in people subjected to 
strenuous physical activity like athletes or those practising recreational exercises, use of antioxidant 
supplements remains controversial. Only foods rich in antioxidants could be the recommendation.   
 

Recommendations for dietary intake of antioxidants 
 

People who run the risk of low intake of AO include economically poor, tobacco users and 
those who are perpetually on slimming diets or reduced intake of diet due to disease and related 
surgical interventions. In India, supra normal intakes are rare and therefore AO rich diets can be 
safely recommended to maximize potential health benefits and minimize toxicity. Liberal intake of 
vegetables, fruits, whole grains, legumes, nuts, seeds, spices, low fat dairy products to postpone 
ageing and fight diet-related chronic disorders and to promote better quality of life, should be 
recommended. Though short-term intervention studies in literature show biological effects, they 
will depend on the class of polyphenols. There are clear gaps. Therefore, it is not possible to fix 
dietary requirements for antioxidants till such time as co-ordinated research efforts are available on 
accurate biomarkers of risk for diseases and long-term functional benefits in terms of disease 
prevention and health promotion. There are two aspects to be considered. There is a wide range of 
non-nutrients, each of which can be exerting its AO activity. It is not possible to fix the AO activity 
from a food like fruits or vegetables. At present the amount of AO to be consumed daily to protect 
against risk factors cannot be quantitatively fixed. What can be recommended currently is 
consumption of a generous amount of fruits and vegetables (500 g/d) to protect against certain 
chronic disorders. Such a level of intake of fruits and vegetables also provides some of the vitamins, 
viz. vitamin A, vitamin E, etc., at higher than RDA levels.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

293 
 



References 

1. National Academy of Science. Diet and Health. Implications for reducing chronic disease. Washington 
DC. National Academy Press, 1989. 

2. Krishnaswamy K. Newer roles of vegetables in the prevention and control of problems of over nutrition 
and chronic degenerative diseases. Food security and vegetables-A global perspective. Banglore, India: 
Dr Prem Nath Agricultural Science Foundation. 2004:162-80. 

3.  Dusting GJ, Triggle C. Are we over oxidized? Oxidative stress, cardiovascular disease, and the future of 
intervention studies with antioxidants. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2005; 1(2):93-7.  

4. Gey KF. Prospects for prevention of free radical disease, regarding cancer and cardio vascular disease. 
British Medical Bulletien. 1993; 49:679-99. 

5. Rice-Evans CA, Miller NJ, Paganga G. Structure-antioxidant activity relationships of flavonoids and 
phenolic acids. Free radical biology and medicine. 1996 Jan 1; 20(7):933-56. 

6. Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Poly-phenols and Health.  Dietary polyphenols and 
health. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2005; S215-335.  

7. Greig L, Maxwell S. Anti-oxidants-a protective role in cardiovascular disease? Expert opinion on 
pharmacotherapy. 2001 Nov 1; 2(11):1737-50. 

8. Hennekens CH, Gaziano JM, Manson JA and Buring JE. Antioxidant vitamin cardiovascular disease 
hypothesis is still promising but still unproven: The need for randomized trials. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition 62: 1985; S1377-80. 

9. Mitchension MJ, Stephens NG, Persons A et al. Mortality in the CHAOS trial. Lancet. 1999; 353: 381-2. 

10. Alpha-Tocopherol Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effect of vitamin E and beta 
carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in male smokers. New England Journal of 
Medicine. 1994 Apr 14; 330(15):1029-35. 

11. Omenn GS, Goodman GE and Thornquist MD. Effects of a combination of -carotene and vitamin A on 
lung cancer and cardiovascular diseases. New England Journal of Medicine. 1996; 334 (18): 1150-5. 

12. Rapola JM, Virtamo J, Ripatti S, Huttunen JK, Albanes D, Taylor PR, Heinonen OP. Randomised trial 
of α-tocopherol and β-carotene supplements on incidence of major coronary events in men with previous 
myocardial infarction. The Lancet. 1997 Jun 14; 349(9067):1715-20. 

13. Stich HF, Hornby P and Dunn BP. A pilot -carotene intervention trial with inuits using smokeless 
tobacco. International Journal of Cancer. 1985; 36:321-7. 

14. Stich HF, Rosin MP, Hornby AP, Mathew B, Sankaranarayanan R, Nair MK. Remission of oral 
leukoplakias and micronuclei in tobacco/betel quid chewers treated with beta‐carotene and with 
beta‐carotene plus vitamin A. International Journal of Cancer. 1988 Aug 15; 42(2):195-9. 

15. Blot WJ, Li JY, Taylor PR, Guo W, Dawsey S, Wang GQ, Yang CS, Zheng SF, Gail M, Li GY, Yu Y. 
Nutrition intervention trials in Linxian, China: supplementation with specific vitamin/mineral 
combinations, cancer incidence, and disease-specific mortality in the general population. JNCI: Journal 
of the National Cancer Institute. 1993 Sep 15; 85(18):1483-91. 

16. Clark LC, Combs GF, Turnbull BW, Slate EH, Chalker DK, Chow J, Davis LS, Glover RA, Graham GF, 
Gross EG, Krongrad A. Effects of selenium supplementation for cancer prevention in patients with 
carcinoma of the skin: a randomized controlled trial. Jama. 1996 Dec 25; 276(24):1957-63. 

 17. Krishnaswamy K, Prasad MP, Krishna TP, Annapurna VV, Reddy GA. A case study of nutrient 
intervention of oral precancerous lesions in India. European journal of cancer part B: oral oncology. 
1995 Jan 1; 31(1):41-8. 

18. Prasad MP, Mukundan MA, Krishnaswamy K. Micronuclei and carcinogen DNA adducts as 
intermediate end points in nutrient intervention trial of precancerous lesions in the oral cavity. European 
Journal of Cancer Part B: Oral Oncology. 1995 May 1; 31(3):155-9. 

294 
 



19. Lodi G, Sardella A, Bez C, Demarosi F, Carrassi A. Systematic review of randomized trials for the 
treatment of oral leukoplakia. Journal of dental education. 2002 Aug; 66(8):896-902. 

20. Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Simonetti RG, Gluud C. Antioxidant supplements for preventing 
gastrointestinal cancers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev., 2004, Oct., 18 (4): CD004183. Evid Based Nurs. 
2005; 8(2):48. 

21. Stanner SA, Hughes J, Kelly CN, Buttriss J. A review of the epidemiological evidence for the 
‘antioxidant hypothesis’. Public health nutrition. 2004 May; 7(3):407-22. 

22. Evans JR, Lawrenson JG. Antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements for slowing the progression of 
age‐related macular degeneration. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2017(7). 

23. World Cancer Research Fund in Association with American Institute of Cancer Research. Food nutrition 
and prevention of cancer: A global perspective, 1997. 

 

295 
 



 
16. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH  

 
 

1. It is critical to get current and precise estimates of what is being eaten in India, at all ages, all 
socioeconomic levels and geographical areas. This was earlier done by the NNMB, but this 
needs to be expanded and restored.   

2. Additional information on health (anthropometry, biomarkers of nutritional status and 
overnutrition) also needs to be collected simultaneously. This needs to be collected at the 
household level, powered adequately for district level estimates. Measurement of body 
composition also should be undertaken in subgroups.  

3. Energy, protein and fat requirements of young children, and the response of body composition 
to feeding.  

4. Evaluate appropriate and optimum feeding for SAM and MAM, along with body composition 
and blood biomarkers. 

5. Evaluate biomarker cut-offs to define health in India.  This requires a proper survey of 
anthropometry and nutritional biomarkers of healthy, adequately nourished population of 
different age and gender groups, residing in different urban and rural areas of the country. 

6. Defining the extent of physiological adaptation to different nutrient intake levels, with a view 
to defining functional cut-offs for deficiency.   

7. Direct estimation of energy requirements through measurement of energy expenditure and 
physical activity by the doubly labelled water (DLW) and heart rate monitor (HRM) methods, 
in urban and rural areas.  

8. Direct determination of energy requirement of Indian infants, preschool children, children up 
to 10 years and adolescents employing the DLW method and HRM methods.  

9. Longitudinal breast milk nutrient studies and its relationship to maternal nutritional status.  

10. Nutrient requirements of special groups such as those engaged in heavy physical work, and 
sports persons.  

11. Nutrient requirement during pregnancy and lactation, in relation to gestational weight gain. 

12. More systematic calcium balance studies have to be done in normal subjects (adolescents, 
postmenopausal women and men post 65 y) on predominantly vegetarian diet with limited 
protein intake. This need to be accompanied by bone density study to match the two 
measurements.  

13. Beneficial effects of vitamin D supplements during pregnancy, infancy and childhood and   
long-term effects of higher vitamin D intakes, differences in vitamin D2, D3 supplements and 
natural vitamin D, their kinetics and efficiency.  

14. Zinc and iron bioavailability from whole meals needs to be assessed in different physiological 
groups, particularly pregnant and lactating women, using stable isotope labelling method.  

15. Identifying reliable indicators and defining cut-off values for clinical and subclinical 
deficiency states or functional and biochemical end points for vitamins like  A, D, B1, B2, 
B6,B12, folic acid etc. with specific biomarkers based studies. 

16. More reliable data has to be collected on folate in Indian foods and their absorption.  

296 

 



17. Definitive studies are necessary to fix the beta carotene to vitamin A conversion ratio. This 
will help in fixing vitamin A requirements in terms of beta carotene intake. 

18. Determine antioxidant potential of different Indian foods.  

19. Studies to determine the requirements, lower and upper limits of macronutrient intakes 
carbohydrates including fiber, fats with special focus on EFA and proteins, keeping in view 
the current nutrition scenario. 

20. Role of nutrients on epigenetic processes and application of nutrigenomics to develop 
personalized nutrition guidelines. 

21. In view of current status of mandatory food fortification with certain nutrients, in the context 
of nutrient -nutrient interactions, it is essential to conduct periodic studies to evaluate the SUL, 
TUL, NOAEL etc. 

 

297 

 



  

298 
 



APPENDICES 

Appendix 1 

A1. Food composition and nutrient content value of balanced diet for moderate active man 

Non- 
Food Amount  Vegetarian 

Nutrient vegetarian EAR RDA 
Composition (g /day) diet 

diet 
Cereals & Millets 360 Energy (kcal) 2690 2650 2710 2710 
  Protein (g) 87.5 81.7 43 54 
Pulses (Legumes)/ 

120 Visible fat (g) 35 35 30 30 
flesh foods1 
Green leafy  

150 Calcium (mg) 1084 1054 1000 
vegetables 800 
Other Vegetables 200 Iron (mg) 33.3 31.1 11 19.0 
Roots & Tubers 
(excluding 100 Zinc (mg) 16.3 15.9 14.0 17 
potatoes) 
Fruits 150 Magnesium (mg) 968 891 320 385 

Milk 300 Vitamin A (µg)* 1802 1796 460 1000 

Fats & Oils 30  β carotene 9842 9779 2760 6000 

Oil seeds & Nuts Thiamine (mg) 2.0 1.9 1.5 1.8 
(gingely seeds & 30 
Pea nuts) Riboflavin (mg) 1.9 1.9 2.1 2.5 

Niacin (mg) 19 20.0 15 18 

Vitamin B6 (mg) 2.4 2.4 1.7 2.1 

 Vitamin C (mg) 209 209 65 80 

Total Folates (µg) 559 491 250 300 

Vitamin B12 (µg)2 1.5 2.4 2.0 2.5 

 
1 Protein quality depends on the type of food. 
1Pulses can be replaced with animal foods (egg, meat, fish and chicken) for non-vegetarians to meet the 
requirements.  
2Only 60% of the RDA of vitamin B12 can be met by the vegetarian diet. 

* Retinol derived from β carotene from diet was also added to the total  

For cereals and millets, it is recommended to consume 50% as whole grains. 

For green leafy vegetables (GLVs), it is recommended to consume 150g of GLVs, especially drumstick 
leaves, amaranth and bathua leaves to meet the requirements of all the vitamins and minerals. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

299 
 



Appendix 2 

A2. Food composition and nutrient content value of balanced diet for sedentary man 

Non- 
Food Amount Vegetarian 

Nutrient vegetarian EAR RDA 
Composition (g /day) diet 

diet 
Energy (kcal) 2130 2084 2110 2110 

Cereals & Millets 275 
Protein (g) 67.2 69.1 43 54 

Pulses (Legumes)/ 
80 Visible fat (g) 25 25 25 25 

flesh foods 1 
Green leafy 

150 Calcium (mg) 968 958 800 1000 
vegetables 
Other Vegetables 200 Iron (mg) 27.4 26.3 11.0 19.0 
Roots & Tubers 
(excluding 100 Zinc (mg) 13.5 13.2 14.0 17.0 
potatoes) 

Fruits 150 Magnesium (mg) 798 762 320 385 

Milk 300 Vitamin A (µg)* 1768 1765 460 1000 
Fats & Oils 25 Β-carotene (µg) 9638 9605 2760 6000 
Oil seeds& Nuts 
(gingely seeds & 30 Thiamine (mg) 1.7 1.6 1.2 1.4 
Pea nuts) 
Spices 10 Riboflavin (mg) 1.6 1.6 1.6 2.0 

Niacin (mg) 15.6 16.0 12 14 
Vitamin B6 (mg) 2.0 2.0 1.3 1.6 

 Vitamin C (mg)   65 80 
Total Folates (µg) 483 450 250 300 
Vitamin B12 (µg)2 1.5 2.0 2.0 2.5 

 

1 Protein quality depends on the type of foods. 
1Pulses can be replaced with animal foods (egg, meat, fish and chicken) for non-vegetarians to meet the 
requirements.  
2Only 60% of the RDA of vitamin B12 can be met by the vegetarian diet. 

* Retinol derived from β carotene from diet was also added to the total 

For cereals and millets, it is recommended to consume 50% as whole grains. 

For green leafy vegetables (GLVs), it is recommended to consume 150g of GLVs, especially drumstick 
leaves, amaranth and bathua leaves to meet the requirements of all the vitamins and minerals.  

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

300 
 



Appendix 3 

A3. Food composition and nutrient content value of balanced diet for moderate active woman 
 

Non- 
Food Amount Vegetarian 

Nutrient vegetarian EAR RDA 
Composition (g /day) diet 

diet 

Energy (kcal) 2135 2084 2130 2130 
Cereals & Millets 300 

Protein (g) 74.2 73.3 36.3 45.7 

Pulses (Legumes)/ 
90 Visible fat (g) 20 20 25 20 

flesh foods 1 

Green leafy 
150 Calcium (mg) 999 989 800 1000 

vegetables 

Other Vegetables 200 Iron (mg) 29.0 27.9 15.0 29.0 

Roots & Tubers 
(excluding 100 Zinc (mg) 14.0 13.6 11.0 13.2 

potatoes) 

Fruits 150 Magnesium (mg) 841 806 270 325 

Milk 300 Vitamin A (µg) * 1804 1741 390 840 

Fats & Oils 20 Β-carotene (µg) 9489 9457 - - 

Oil seeds& Nuts 
(gingely seeds &  30 Thiamine (mg) 1.75 1.70 1.4 1.7 

Pea nuts) 

spices 10 Riboflavin (mg) 1.65 1.64 2.0 2.4 
Niacin (mg) 16.3 16.8 12 14 
Vitamin B6 (mg) 1.96 1.97 1.3 1.6 

 Vitamin C (mg) 187 187 55 65 
Total Folates (µg) 191 459 180 220 
Vitamin B12 (µg)2 1.5 2.0 2 2.5 

 

1 Protein quality depends on the type of foods. 
1Pulses can be replaced with animal foods (egg, meat, fish and chicken) for non-vegetarians to meet the 
requirements.  
2Only 60% of the RDA of vitamin B12 can be met by the vegetarian diet. 

* Retinol derived from β carotene from diet was also added to the total 

For cereals and millets, it is recommended to consume 50% as whole grains. 

For green leafy vegetables (GLVs), it is recommended to consume 150g of GLVs, especially drumstick 
leaves, amaranth and bathua leaves to meet the requirements of all the vitamins and minerals.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

301 
 



Appendix 4 

A4. Food composition and nutrient content value of balanced diet for Sedentary woman 
 

Non- 
Amount Vegetarian 

Food Composition Nutrient vegetarian EAR RDA 
(g /day) diet 

diet 
Energy (kcal) 1690 1650 1660 1660 

Cereals & Millets 200 
Protein (g) 58.2 57.4 36.3 45.7 

Pulses (Legumes)1 60 Visible fat (g) 15 15 20 20 

Green leafy 
150 Calcium (mg) 905 895 800 1000 

vegetables 

Other Vegetables 200 Iron (mg) 23.8 22.8 15.0 29.0 

Roots & Tubers 
100 Zinc (mg) 11.0 10.5 11.0 13.2 

(excluding potatoes) 

Fruits 150 Magnesium (mg) 684 649 270 325 

Milk 300 Vitamin A (µg) * 1730 1727 390 840 

Fats & Oils 15 Β-carotene (µg) 9412 9380 - - 

Oil seeds& Nuts 
(gingely seeds & Pea 30 Thiamine (mg) 1.36 1.30 1.1 1.4 

nuts) 

spices 10 Riboflavin (mg) 1.5 1.48 1.6 1.9 
Niacin (mg) 13.0 13.5 9.0 11.0 
Vitamin B6 (mg) 1.7 1.7 1.3 1.6 

 Vitamin C (mg) 187 187 55 65 
Total Folates (µg) 426 395 180 220 
Vitamin B12 (µg)2 1.5 2.0 2 2.5 

 

1 Protein quality depends on the type of foods. 
1Pulses can be replaced with animal foods (egg, meat, fish and chicken) for non-vegetarians to meet the 
requirements.  
2Only 60% of the RDA of vitamin B12 can be met by the vegetarian diet. 

* Retinol derived from β carotene from diet was also added to the total 

For cereals and millets, it is recommended to consume 50% as whole grains. 

For green leafy vegetables (GLVs), it is recommended to consume 150g of GLVs, especially drumstick 
leaves, amaranth and bathua leaves to meet the requirements of all the vitamins and minerals.  

 
 

 

 

 

 

  

302 
 



Appendix 5 

A5. Food composition and nutrient content value of balanced diet for pregnant woman 

Food Non-
Amount Vegetarian 

Composition Nutrient vegetari EAR RDA 
(g /day) diet 

 an diet 

Energy (kcal) 2060 2040 2010 2010 
Cereals & Millets 250 

Protein (g) 71.7 71.6 54 56 

Pulses (Legumes)1 75 Visible fat (g) 15 15 30 30 
Green leafy 

150 Calcium (mg) 980 970 800 1000 
vegetables 

Other Vegetables 200 Iron (mg) 27.2 26.0 32 40 

Roots & Tubers 
(excluding 100 Zinc (mg) 13.1 12.8 13.0 15.5 
potatoes) 

Fruits 150 Magnesium (mg) 786 747 320 385 

Milk 400 Vitamin A (µg) * 1821 1818 406 900 

Fats & Oils 15 Β-carotene (µg) 9634 9597 - - 

Oil seeds& Nuts 
(gingely seeds & 40 Thiamine (mg) 1.64 1.60 1.4 1.7 
Pea nuts) 

Spices 10 Riboflavin (mg) 1.8 1.84 2.3 2.19 

Niacin (mg) 16.0 16.7 14 14 

Vitamin B6 (mg) 2.0 2.0 1.6 2.0 

 Vitamin C (mg) 210 210 65 70 

Total Folates (µg) 484 447 480 570 

Vitamin B12 (µg)2 2.0 2.4 2.2 2.8 
 

1 Protein quality depends on the type of foods. 
1Pulses can be replaced with animal foods (egg, meat, fish and chicken) for non-vegetarians to meet the 
requirements.  
2Only 80% of the RDA of vitamin B12 can be met by the vegetarian diet. 

* Retinol derived from β carotene from diet was also added to the total 

For cereals and millets, it is recommended to consume 50% as whole grains. 

For green leafy vegetables (GLVs), it is recommended to consume 150g of GLVs, especially drumstick 
leaves, amaranth and bathua leaves to meet the requirements of all the vitamins and minerals.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

303 
 



Appendix 6 
 

A6. Key micronutrients in different food groups 
(All values are for 100g edible portion) 

 

Iron (mg)  3.00 5 8.5 2.12 0.6 0.56 0.2 0.2 1.82 1.5 1.3 2.2 0.6 6.3 

Zinc (mg) 2.16 2.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.11 0.4 0.3 1.2 1.7 3 4.6 0.6 3.6 

Vitamin A 
2.43 8.6 259.1 22.4 70.0 32.36 49.8 58.3 198 21.4 9 15.5 5.6 6690 

(µg) 

Riboflavin 
0.15 0.14 0.1 0.07 0.0 0.01 0.13 0.11 0.2 0.09 0.16 0.12 0.03 0.36 

(mg) 

Dietary 
24.03 127.7 16.7 24.4 31.3 17.61 8.6 7 49.3 9.3 6.4 8.1 15.4 92 

folate (µg)  

Vitamin 
Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 1.5 1.5 1.8 NA 2.8 1.7 1.4 91.9 

B12 (µg) 
 

a  Mean values of nutrients from commonly consumed cereals (67% weightage) such as rice and wheat were 
taken and 33% weightage was also given to millets such as Bajra, Jowar, Maiz and Ragi. 

b  Mean values of nutrients from Lentils, Tur dhal,  Bengal gram, Black gram, Cowpea, Green gram, Peas, 
Rajmah, Red gram and Soyabean were considered. 

c   Carotenoid  conversion to  retinol equivalents.  
d Mean values of nutrients from Beetroot, Carrot, Colocasia, Onion, Radish, Tapioca and Yam were 

considered. 
e  Mean values of nutrients from Amla, Apple, Banana, Cherries, Grapes, Guava, Jack fruit, Lemon, Lichi, 

Mango, Melon, Orange, Papaya, Pine apple, Pomegranate, Sapota, Custard apple, Strawberry were 
considered. 

f  Good source of bioavailable calcium. 
 
NA= Not available; NR=Not reported  
 
 Low absorption of non heme iron can be improved by consuming more vitamin C rich foods (Amla, 

Lemon, Oranges, Guava, etc.) in raw form as much as possible. 
 Meat, poultry and liver contains high bio-available heme iron and also increases absorption (meat factor) 

of non-heme iron (including fish). 
  

304 
 

Micronutrients 

Cerealsa 

Pulsesb 

Leafy 
Vegetablesc 

Other vegetables 

Roots & Tubersd 

Fruitse 

Milk (Buffalo') f 

Milk (Cow) f 

Egg 

Chicken 

Mutton 

Beef 

Fish 

Liver  
(Sheep, Goat, 

Lamb) 



References 

1. Longvah T, Ananthan R, Bhaskara Chary K and Venkaiah K (2017). Indian Food Composition Tables – 
2017, ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition.  

2. HeimoScherz and Friedrich Senser : Food Composition and Nutrition Tables, Sixth Edition,  Medpharm 
Scientific Publishers Stuttgart, CRC Press, 2000 

3. Food Standards Agency (2002) McCance and Widdowson’s The Composition of Foods, Sixth Summary 
Edition, Cambridge: Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4. Gopalan C, Rama Sastry BV and Balasubramanian SC: Nutritive Value of Indian Foods. First Edition 
1971. Revised and updated by Narasinga Rao BS, Deosthale YG and Pant KC 1989, National Institute of 
Nutrition, Hyderabad.  

305